---
title: "CSE_AI-B-Tech_2023Curriculum-060625-1-year-Syllabus"
source_file: "CSE_AI-B-Tech_2023Curriculum-060625-1-year-Syllabus.pdf"
source_type: pdf
---

# CSE_AI-B-Tech_2023Curriculum-060625-1-year-Syllabus

<!-- page: 1 -->

CURRICULUM 2023 (Autonomous) Version 2.0 B.TECH Computer Science and Engineering (AI) MAR BASELIOS COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY Mar Ivanios Vidyanagar, Nalanchira, Thiruvananthapuram – 695 015 August 2023

<!-- page: 2 -->

CURRICULUM AND DETAILED SYLLABI FOR B. TECH DEGREE PROGRAMME IN COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING (Artificial Intelligence) SEMESTER I & II 2023 SCHEME (AUTONOMOUS) MAR BASELIOS COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY (Approved by AICTE, Autonomous Institution Affiliated to APJ Abdul Kalam Technological University) MAR IVANIOS VIDYANAGAR, NALANCHIRA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM – 695015, KERALA. Phone: 0471 2545866 Fax: 0471 2545869 Web: www.mbcet.ac.in email: hodcs@mbcet.ac.in

<!-- page: 3 -->

B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering(Artificial Intelligence) 2023-2024 3 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 4 -->

B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering(Artificial Intelligence) 2023-2024 MAR BASELIOS COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY Vision and Mission of the Institution Vision: To be an Institution moulding globally competent professionals as epitomes of Noble Values. Mission: To transform the Youth as technically competent, ethically sound and socially committed professionals, by providing a vibrant learning ambience for the welfare of humanity. DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING Vision and Mission of the Department Vision: To be a Centre of Excellence in Computer Science and Engineering providing quality education and research for the betterment of the society. Mission: To impart sound knowledge in theoretical and applied foundations of Computer Science and Engineering, and to train the students to solve real life issues to effectively define and shape life. 4 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 5 -->

B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering(Artificial Intelligence) 2023-2024 PROGRAMME EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES (PEOs) PEO1: Graduates will be successful professionals in Industries of core or interdisciplinary nature or entrepreneurs, demonstrating effective leadership and excellent team work. PEO2: Graduates will expand the horizon of knowledge through higher education or research, leading to self-directed professional development PEO3: Graduates will demonstrate competency in AI & ML, professional attitude and ethics while providing solutions in societal and environmental contexts PROGRAMME OUTCOMES (POs) Engineering graduates will be able to: 1. Engineering knowledge: Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals, and an engineering specialization to the solution of complex engineering problems. 2. Problem analysis: Identify, formulate, review research literature, and analyze complex engineering problems reaching substantiated conclusions using first principles of mathematics, natural sciences, and engineering sciences. 3. Design/development of solutions: Design solutions for complex engineering problems and design system components or processes that meet the specified needs with appropriate consideration for the public health and safety, and the cultural, societal, and environmental considerations. 4. Conduct investigations of complex problems: Use research-based knowledge and research methods including design of experiments, analysis and interpretation of data, and synthesis of the information to provide valid conclusions. 5. Modern tool usage: Create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, and modern engineering and IT tools including prediction and modelling to complex engineering activities with an understanding of the limitations. 6. The engineer and society: Apply reasoning informed by the contextual knowledge to assess societal, health, safety, legal and cultural issues and the consequent responsibilities relevant to the professional engineering practice. 7. Environment and sustainability: Understand the impact of the professional engineering solutions in societal and environmental contexts, and demonstrate the knowledge of, and need for sustainable development. 8. Ethics: Apply ethical principles and commit to professional ethics and responsibilities and norms of the engineering practice. 9. Individual and team work: Function effectively as an individual, and as a member or leader in diverse teams, and in multidisciplinary settings. 5 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 6 -->

B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering(Artificial Intelligence) 2023-2024 10. Communication: Communicate effectively on complex engineering activities with the engineering community and with society at large, such as, being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and receive clear instructions. 11. Project management and finance: Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the engineering and management principles and apply these to one’s own work, as a member and leader in a team, to manage projects and in multidisciplinary environments. 12. Life-long learning: Recognize the need for, and have the preparation and ability to engage in independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of technological change. PROGRAMME SPECIFIC OUTCOMES (PSOs) PSO1: To apply Algorithmic Principles, Programming Skills and Software Engineering Principles to design, develop and evaluate Software Systems of varying complexities. PSO2: To apply knowledge of System Integration to design and implement computer-based systems PSO3: To solve real world and socially relevant problems using AI 6 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 7 -->

|  | Sl. |  | Category |  | Category |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | No. |  |  |  | Code |  |  | 2023 |  |
| 1 |  |  | Humanities and Social Sciences including Management Courses | HSC |  |  | 6 |  |  |
| 2 |  |  | Basic Science Courses | BSC |  |  | 26 |  |  |
| 3 |  |  | Engineering Science Courses | ESC |  |  | 24 |  |  |
| 4 |  |  | Programme Core Courses, Comprehensive Course Work and Viva Voce | PCC |  |  | 72 |  |  |
| 5 |  |  | Programme Elective Courses | PEC |  |  | 18 |  |  |
| 6 |  |  | Institute Elective Courses | IEC |  |  | 6 |  |  |
| 7 |  |  | Project Work and Seminar | PWS |  |  | 15 |  |  |
| 8 |  |  | Professional Development Courses | PDC |  |  | -- |  |  |
| 9 |  |  | Mandatory Student Activities (P/F) | MSA |  |  | 3 |  |  |
|  |  |  | Total Mandatory Credits |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 170 |  |
|  |  |  | Value Added Courses (Optional) – Honours/Minor |  |  |  | 15 |  |  |

|  | Semester |  |  | I |  |  | II |  |  | III |  |  | IV |  |  | V |  |  | VI |  |  | VII |  |  | VIII |  |  | Total Credits |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Credits for Courses |  |  | 19 |  |  | 21 |  |  | 23 |  |  | 22 |  |  | 25 |  |  | 23 |  |  | 20 |  |  | 14 |  |  | 167 |  |  |
|  |  |  | 40 |  |  |  |  |  | 45 |  |  |  |  |  | 48 |  |  |  |  |  | 34 |  |  |  |  |  | 167 |  |  |

B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering(Artificial Intelligence) 2023-2024 DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING B.TECH COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING (Artificial Intelligence) For the students admitted from 2023 Scheduling of Courses i) Knowledge Segments and Credits Every course of B. Tech Programme is placed in one of the nine categories as listed in the following table. No semester shall have more than six lecture-based courses and two laboratory courses, and/or drawing/seminar/project courses in the curriculum. Sl. Category Category No. Code 2023 Humanities and Social Sciences including Management 1 HSC Courses 6 2 Basic Science Courses BSC 26 3 Engineering Science Courses ESC 24 Programme Core Courses, Comprehensive Course Work 4 PCC and Viva Voce 72 5 Programme Elective Courses PEC 18 6 Institute Elective Courses IEC 6 7 Project Work and Seminar PWS 15 8 Professional Development Courses PDC -- 9 Mandatory Student Activities (P/F) MSA 3 Total Mandatory Credits 170 15 Value Added Courses (Optional) – Honours/Minor ii) Semester-wise Credit Distribution Semester I II III IV V VI VII VIII Total Credits Credits for Courses 19 21 23 22 25 23 20 14 167 40 45 48 34 167 7 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 8 -->

|  | SEMESTER I |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Slot |  |  | Cate- |  |  | Course |  | Courses |  | Credit Structure |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | SS |  |  | Hours |  |  | Credit |  |  |
|  |  |  | gory |  |  | Code |  |  |  | L |  |  | T |  |  | P |  |  | J |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| A |  | BSC |  |  | 23MAL10A |  |  | Linear Algebra and Calculus | 3 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 5 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 4 |  |  |
| B |  | BSC |  |  | 23PYL10A |  |  | Engineering Physics | 3 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 5 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 4 |  |  |
| D |  | ESC |  |  | 23ESB10E |  |  | Programming in C | 2 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 4.5 |  |  | 5 |  |  | 4 |  |  |
| E |  | ESC |  |  | 23ESL10J |  |  | Basics of Electrical Engineering A | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 2 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | 23ESL10L |  |  | Basics of Electronics Engineering | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 3 |  |  |  |  |  | 2 |  |  |
| G |  | ESC |  |  | 23ESL1NA |  |  | Environmental Science | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1* |  |  |
| S |  | BSC |  |  | 23PYP10A |  |  | Engineering Physics Lab | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1 |  |  |
| T |  | ESC |  |  | 23ESP10B |  |  | Electrical and Electronics Workshop | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1 |  |  |
|  | TOTAL |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 25.5 |  |  | 23 |  |  | 19 |  |

|  | SEMESTER II |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Slot |  | Cate- gory | Course Code | Courses |  | Credit |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | SS |  |  | Hours |  |  | Credit |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  | Structure |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | L |  | T |  |  | P |  |  | J |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| A |  | BSC | 23MAL10B | Vector Calculus, Differential Equations and Transforms | 3 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 5 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 4 |  |  |
| B |  | BSC | 23CYL10A | Engineering Chemistry | 3 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 5 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 4 |  |  |
| C |  | ESC | 23ESB10A | Engineering Graphics | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 3 |  |  |
| D |  | ESC | 23ESB10H | Programming using Python | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 3 |  |  |
| E |  | PCC | 23ESL10Q | Digital Electronics | 3 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 4.5 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 3 |  |  |
| G |  | HSC | 23HSJ1NB | Professional Communication | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 5 |  |  | 4 |  |  | 1* |  |  |
| S |  | BSC | 23CYP10A | Engineering Chemistry Lab | 0 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 1 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 1 |  |  |
| T |  | ESC | 23ESB10P | Manufacturing and Construction Practices B | 1 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2 |  |  | 0 |  |  | 2.5 |  |  | 3 |  |  | 2 |  |  |
|  | TOTAL |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 31 |  |  | 28 |  |  | 21 |  |

| Course |
| --- |
| Code |

| Cate- |
| --- |
| gory |

B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering(Artificial Intelligence) 2023-2024 SEMESTER I Cate- Course Credit Structure Slot Courses SS Hours Credit gory Code L T P J A BSC 23MAL10A Linear Algebra and 3 1 0 0 5 4 4 Calculus B BSC 23PYL10A Engineering Physics 3 1 0 0 5 4 4 D ESC 23ESB10E Programming in C 2 1 2 0 4.5 5 4 23ESL10J Basics of Electrical 2 0 0 0 3 2 Engineering A E ESC 4 23ESL10L Basics of Electronics 2 0 0 0 3 2 Engineering G ESC 23ESL1NA Environmental Science 2 0 0 0 3 2 1* S BSC 23PYP10A Engineering Physics Lab 0 0 2 0 1 2 1 T ESC 23ESP10B Electrical and Electronics 0 0 2 0 1 2 1 Workshop TOTAL 25.5 23 19 SEMESTER II Credit Cate- Course Slot gory Courses Structure SS Hours Credit Code L T P J Vector Calculus, Differential A BSC 23MAL10B 3 1 0 0 5 4 4 Equations and Transforms B BSC 3 1 0 0 4 4 23CYL10A Engineering Chemistry 5 C ESC 2 0 2 0 4 3 23ESB10A Engineering Graphics 4 D ESC 2 0 2 0 4 3 23ESB10H Programming using Python 4 E PCC 3 0 0 0 3 3 23ESL10Q Digital Electronics 4.5 G HSC 2 0 0 2 4 1* 23HSJ1NB Professional Communication 5 S BSC 0 0 2 0 2 1 23CYP10A Engineering Chemistry Lab 1 T ESC 23ESB10P Manufacturing and 1 0 2 0 3 2 2.5 Construction Practices B TOTAL 31 28 21 *Not to be considered for Grade/GPA/CGPA. Pass or Fail Only 8 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 9 -->

B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering(Artificial Intelligence) 2023-2024 Semester I and II First Year Syllabus 9 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 10 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23MAL10A |  | LINEAR ALGEBRA |  | BSC | 3 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 4 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | AND CALCULUS |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Solve systems of linear equations. | Apply |
| CO 2 |  |  | Compute maxima and minima using partial derivatives. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Compute areas and volumes of geometrical shapes using multiple integrals. | Apply |
| CO 4 |  |  | Identify the convergence or divergence of an infinite series. | Apply |
| CO 5 |  |  | Determine the Taylor and Fourier series expansion of functions and learn their applications. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction LINEAR ALGEBRA 23MAL10A BSC 3 1 0 0 4 2023 AND CALCULUS i. COURSE OVERVIEW This course introduces students to some basic mathematical ideas and tools which are at the core of any engineering course. A brief course in Linear Algebra familiarizes students with some basic techniques in matrix theory which are essential for analyzing linear systems. The calculus of functions of one or more variables taught in this course are useful in modelling and analyzing physical phenomena involving continuous change of variables or parameters and have applications across all branches of engineering. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes CO 1 Solve systems of linear equations. Apply CO 2 Compute maxima and minima using partial derivatives. Apply Compute areas and volumes of geometrical shapes using multiple CO 3 Apply integrals. CO 4 Identify the convergence or divergence of an infinite series. Apply Determine the Taylor and Fourier series expansion of functions and CO 5 Apply learn their applications. iii. SYLLABUS Basics of Linear Algebra – Solution of systems of linear equations, row echelon form, rank, eigen values and eigen vectors, diagonalization of matrices, orthogonal transformation, quadratic forms. Partial Differentiation and Applications – Limit and continuity of functions of two or more variables, partial derivatives, chain rule, total derivatives, maxima and minima Multiple Integrals – Double and triple integrals, double integrals over rectangular and non- rectangular regions, changing the order of integration, finding areas and volume, mass and centre of gravity. Infinite series – Convergence and divergence of Infinite series, geometric series and p-series, test 10 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 11 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Linear Algebra: Systems of linear equations, Solution by Gauss elimination, row echelon form and rank of a matrix, fundamental theorem for linear systems (homogeneous and non-homogeneous, without proof), Eigen values and eigen vectors. Diagonalization of matrices, orthogonal transformation, quadratic forms and their canonical forms. |  |  | 12 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Multivariable calculus-Differentiation: Concept of limit and continuity of functions of two variables, partial derivatives, Differentials, Local Linear approximations, chain rule, total derivative, Relative maxima and minima, Absolute maxima and minima on closed and bounded set. |  |  | 12 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 of convergence, Alternating series, absolute and conditional convergence. Taylor series, Binomial series and series representation of exponential, trigonometric, logarithmic functions –Fourier Series– Euler’s formulas, Fourier sine and cosine series, Half range expansions iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. H. Anton, I. Biven, S. Davis, “Calculus”, Wiley, 10th Edition, 2015. 2. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 10th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2016. (b) REFERENCES 1. J. Stewart, Essential Calculus, Cengage, 2nd Edition, 2017. 2. G.B. Thomas and R.L. Finney, Calculus and Analytic geometry, 9th Edition, Pearson, Reprint, 2002. Peter V. O'Neil, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Cengage,7th Edition 2012. 3. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Linear Algebra: Systems of linear equations, Solution by Gauss elimination, row echelon form and rank of a matrix, fundamental theorem I for linear systems (homogeneous and non-homogeneous, without proof), 12 Eigen values and eigen vectors. Diagonalization of matrices, orthogonal transformation, quadratic forms and their canonical forms. Multivariable calculus-Differentiation: Concept of limit and continuity of functions of two variables, partial derivatives, Differentials, Local Linear II approximations, chain rule, total derivative, Relative maxima and minima, 12 Absolute maxima and minima on closed and bounded set. 11 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 12 -->

| III | Multivariable calculus-Integration: Double integrals (Cartesian), reversing the order of integration, change of coordinates (Cartesian to polar), finding areas and volume using double integrals, mass and centre of gravity of inhomogeneous laminas using double integral. Triple integrals, volume calculated as triple integral, triple integral in cylindrical and spherical coordinates (computations involving spheres, cylinders). | 12 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| IV | Sequences and Series: Convergence of sequences and series, convergence of geometric series and p-series(without proof), test of convergence (comparison, ratio and root tests without proof); Alternating series and Leibnitz test, absolute and conditional convergence. | 12 |
| V | Series representation of functions: Taylor series (without proof, assuming the possibility of power series expansion in appropriate domains), Binomial series and series representation of exponential, trigonometric, logarithmic functions (without proofs of convergence); Fourier series, Euler formulas, Convergence of Fourier series (without proof), half range sine and cosine series, Parseval’s theorem (without proof). | 12 |
| Total Hours |  | 60 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Multivariable calculus-Integration: Double integrals (Cartesian), reversing the order of integration, change of coordinates (Cartesian to polar), finding areas and volume using double integrals, mass and centre of gravity of inhomogeneous laminas using double integral. Triple integrals, III 12 volume calculated as triple integral, triple integral in cylindrical and spherical coordinates (computations involving spheres, cylinders). Sequences and Series: Convergence of sequences and series, convergence of geometric series and p-series(without proof), test of convergence IV (comparison, ratio and root tests without proof); Alternating series and 12 Leibnitz test, absolute and conditional convergence. Series representation of functions: Taylor series (without proof, assuming the possibility of power series expansion in appropriate domains), Binomial series and series representation of exponential, trigonometric, logarithmic V 12 functions (without proofs of convergence); Fourier series, Euler formulas, Convergence of Fourier series (without proof), half range sine and cosine series, Parseval’s theorem (without proof). Total Hours 60 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 40: 60 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 40 marks End Semester Examination : 60 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 02 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 2 ½ modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 60 • Exam Duration: 3 hours 12 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 13 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23PYL10A |  | ENGINEERING |  | BSC | 3 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 4 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | PHYSICS |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Describe the characteristics of different types of oscillations and waves. | Understand |
| CO 2 |  |  | Explain natural physical processes and related technological advances using principles of optics | Understand |
| CO 3 |  |  | Generalise the principles of quantum mechanics to explain the behaviour of matter in the atomic and subatomic level | Understand |
| CO 4 |  |  | Describe the fundamentals of lasers and the principles behind various solid state lighting devices and fibre optic communication system. | Understand |
| CO 5 |  |  | Explain the fundamental ideas of Ultrasonics and acoustics in order to facilitate technological advancement. | Understand |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction ENGINEERING 23PYL10A BSC 3 1 0 0 4 2023 PHYSICS i. COURSE OVERVIEW The aim of the course is to develop scientific attitude in students and offer them an understanding of physical concepts behind various engineering applications. It creates an urge in students to think creatively in emerging areas of Physics. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Describe the characteristics of different types of oscillations and CO 1 Understand waves. Explain natural physical processes and related technological CO 2 Understand advances using principles of optics Generalise the principles of quantum mechanics to explain the CO 3 Understand behaviour of matter in the atomic and subatomic level Describe the fundamentals of lasers and the principles behind CO 4 various solid state lighting devices and fibre optic communication Understand system. Explain the fundamental ideas of Ultrasonics and acoustics CO 5 Understand in order to facilitate technological advancement. iii. SYLLABUS Oscillations and Waves: Harmonic oscillations – Damped harmonic oscillations, Forced harmonic oscillations, Q- factor, Amplitude resonance, comparison of electrical and mechanical oscillator. Wave motion – Longitudinal waves and Transverse waves, One dimensional wave equation and solution, three-dimensional wave equations, Transverse vibrations along a stretched string. Wave Optics: Interference of light – Cosine law, Wedge shaped films - Air wedge, Newton’s rings, Antireflection coating. Diffraction- comparison of Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction, Fraunhofer diffraction due to double slit, grating equation, Rayleigh’s criterion, resolving power and dispersive power of grating. 13 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 14 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Quantum Mechanics & Nano technology: Wave function, Uncertainty principle, Time dependent and time independent Schrodinger wave equations, Applications of Schrodinger wave equation - particle in one-dimensional potential well, quantum mechanical tunneling. Introduction to nanoscience and technology, significance of surface to volume ratio, Quantum confinement, Characterization techniques – XRD, UV-Visible Spectroscopy, Applications of nanomaterials. Laser and Photonics: Principles of Laser, Properties of laser, Ruby laser and Helium neon laser, Applications of Laser. Holography-construction of hologram, reconstruction of hologram, Applications. Introduction to photonics - photonic devices - Light Emitting Diode, Solar cells, Optical fibre – Principle of OFC, Numerical aperture, Types of fibers– step index fibre , Graded index fibre, Fibre Optic Communication System, Applications of Optical fibre, Fibre optic sensors. Acoustics & Ultrasonic: Acoustics - characteristics of musical sounds, absorption coefficient, reverberation time- Sabine’s formula (no derivation), significance, factors affecting architectural acoustics and their remedies. Ultrasonics - production by magnetostriction oscillator and piezoelectric oscillator, detection of ultrasonic waves - thermal and piezoelectric methods, ultrasonic diffractometer-, applications of ultrasonic waves -SONAR, NDT, medical applications. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. M.N. Avadhanulu, P.G. Kshirsagar, T.V.S Arun Murthy, A Text book of Engineering Physics, S. Chand & Co., Revised Edition, 2014 2. H.K. Malik, A.K. Singh, Engineering Physics, McGraw Hill Education, 2nd Edition, 2017 (b) REFERENCES 1. Arthur Beiser, Concepts of Modern Physics, Tata McGraw Hill Publications, 6th Edition, 2003. 2. Aruldhas G., Engineering Physics, Prentice Hall of India Pvt Ltd., 2015 3. Ajoy Ghatak, Optics, Mc Graw Hill Education, 6th Edition, 2017 4. David J. Griffiths, Introduction to Electrodynamics, Addison-Wesley ublishing, 4th Edition, 1999. 5. Choudhary, Nityanand, K. R. Deepak, S. H. Abdi, Perspective of Engineering: Physics: I, Acme Learning Pvt Ltd, first edition, 2009. 6. A. S. Vasudeva, A Text Book of Engineering Physics, S. Chand &Co., first edition: 14 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 15 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Oscillations and Waves: Harmonic oscillations, damped harmonic motion - derivation of differential equation and its solution, over damped, critically damped and under damped cases, Quality factor- expression, forced oscillations - differential equation, derivation of expressions for amplitude and phase of forced oscillations, amplitude resonance - expression for resonant frequency, sharpness of resonance, electrical analogy of mechanical oscillators. Wave motion- distinction between transverse and longitudinal waves, derivation of one-dimensional wave equation and its solution, three- dimensional wave equation and its solution (no derivation), transverse vibration in a stretched string, statement of laws of Vibration |  |  | 12 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Wave Optics: Interference of light- theory of thin films - cosine law (Reflected system), derivation of the conditions of constructive and destructive interference, interference due to wedge shaped films - determination of thickness and test for optical planeness, Newton’s rings- measurement of wavelength and refractive index, antireflection coatings. Diffraction of light, Fresnel and Fraunhofer classes of diffraction, diffraction due to double slit, diffraction grating-Grating equation, Rayleigh criterion for limit of resolution, resolving and dispersive power of a grating with expression (no derivation) |  |  | 12 |  |  |
| III |  |  | Quantum Mechanics & Nanotechnology: Introduction for the need of Quantum mechanics, wave nature of Particles, de-Brogile wavelength, uncertainty principle, Applications-absence of electrons inside a nucleus and natural line broadening mechanism, physical meaning of wave function, formulation of time dependent and independent Schrodinger wave equations, Applications of Schrodinger equation - Particle in a one dimensional box- derivation for normalised wave function and energy Eigen values, Quantum mechanical tunnelling (qualitative). Introduction to nanoscience and technology, Effect of surface to volume ratio for nanomaterials, quantum confinement in one dimensional, two dimensional and three dimensional particles - nano sheets, nano wires and quantum dots, characterization techniques - XRD analysis, UV visible spectroscopy, applications of nanotechnology (qualitative ideas) |  |  | 12 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 2008. 7. Premlet B., Advanced Engineering Physics, Phasor Books,10th Edition, 2017. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Oscillations and Waves: Harmonic oscillations, damped harmonic motion - derivation of differential equation and its solution, over damped, critically damped and under damped cases, Quality factor- expression, forced oscillations - differential equation, derivation of expressions for amplitude and phase of forced oscillations, amplitude resonance - expression for resonant frequency, sharpness of resonance, electrical I 12 analogy of mechanical oscillators. Wave motion- distinction between transverse and longitudinal waves, derivation of one-dimensional wave equation and its solution, three- dimensional wave equation and its solution (no derivation), transverse vibration in a stretched string, statement of laws of Vibration Wave Optics: Interference of light- theory of thin films - cosine law (Reflected system), derivation of the conditions of constructive and destructive interference, interference due to wedge shaped films - determination of thickness and test for optical planeness, Newton’s rings- II measurement of wavelength and refractive index, antireflection coatings. 12 Diffraction of light, Fresnel and Fraunhofer classes of diffraction, diffraction due to double slit, diffraction grating-Grating equation, Rayleigh criterion for limit of resolution, resolving and dispersive power of a grating with expression (no derivation) Quantum Mechanics & Nanotechnology: Introduction for the need of Quantum mechanics, wave nature of Particles, de-Brogile wavelength, uncertainty principle, Applications-absence of electrons inside a nucleus and natural line broadening mechanism, physical meaning of wave function, formulation of time dependent and independent Schrodinger wave equations, Applications of Schrodinger equation - Particle in a one III dimensional box- derivation for normalised wave function and energy 12 Eigen values, Quantum mechanical tunnelling (qualitative). Introduction to nanoscience and technology, Effect of surface to volume ratio for nanomaterials, quantum confinement in one dimensional, two dimensional and three dimensional particles - nano sheets, nano wires and quantum dots, characterization techniques - XRD analysis, UV visible spectroscopy, applications of nanotechnology (qualitative ideas) 15 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 16 -->

| IV | Laser and Photonics: Properties of laser, Absorption and emission of radiation, Spontaneous emission and stimulated emission, Population inversion, Metastable states, basic components of laser, Active medium, pumping mechanism, Optical resonant cavity, working principle. Construction and working of Ruby laser and Helium neon laser, Applications of lasers. Holography – Advantage of hologram over photograph, Recording of hologram, reconstruction of hologram,Applications of hologram. Introduction to photonics - photonic devices - Light Emitting Diode, Solar cells - I-V characteristics, Fiber Optics - Principle of light propagation through optical fiber, Classification of optical fibers - Step index and Graded index fibres, Numerical aperture – Derivation, Fibre optic communication system (block diagram), Applications of optical fiber, Fiber optic sensors. | 12 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| V | Acoustics & Ultrasonics: Acoustics - Classification of Sound-Musical Sound-Noise, Characteristics of Musical Sounds-Pitch or Frequency- Loudness or Intensity Measurement of Intensity Level-Decibel- Quality or timbre, Absorption coefficient, Reverberation, Reverberation Time- Significance - Sabine’s formula (no derivation). Factors affecting architectural acoustics and their remedies. Ultrasonics - Production- Magnetostriction effect and Piezoelectric effect, Magnetostriction oscillator and Piezoelectric oscillator – Working, Detection of ultrasonic waves - Thermal and Piezoelectric methods. Ultrasonic diffractometer – determination of velocity, Applications of ultrasonic waves – industrial applications - SONAR,NDT, Medical applications. | 12 |
| Total Hours |  | 60 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Laser and Photonics: Properties of laser, Absorption and emission of radiation, Spontaneous emission and stimulated emission, Population inversion, Metastable states, basic components of laser, Active medium, pumping mechanism, Optical resonant cavity, working principle. Construction and working of Ruby laser and Helium neon laser, Applications of lasers. Holography – Advantage of hologram over photograph, Recording of hologram, reconstruction of IV 12 hologram,Applications of hologram. Introduction to photonics - photonic devices - Light Emitting Diode, Solar cells - I-V characteristics, Fiber Optics - Principle of light propagation through optical fiber, Classification of optical fibers - Step index and Graded index fibres, Numerical aperture – Derivation, Fibre optic communication system (block diagram), Applications of optical fiber, Fiber optic sensors. Acoustics & Ultrasonics: Acoustics - Classification of Sound-Musical Sound-Noise, Characteristics of Musical Sounds-Pitch or Frequency- Loudness or Intensity Measurement of Intensity Level-Decibel- Quality or timbre, Absorption coefficient, Reverberation, Reverberation Time- Significance - Sabine’s formula (no derivation). Factors affecting architectural acoustics and their remedies. V 12 Ultrasonics - Production- Magnetostriction effect and Piezoelectric effect, Magnetostriction oscillator and Piezoelectric oscillator – Working, Detection of ultrasonic waves - Thermal and Piezoelectric methods. Ultrasonic diffractometer – determination of velocity, Applications of ultrasonic waves – industrial applications - SONAR,NDT, Medical applications. Total Hours 60 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 40: 60 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 40 marks End Semester Examination : 60 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 02 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 2 ½ modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 60 • Exam Duration: 3 hours 16 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 17 -->

| Course Code |  | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23ESB10E | 23ESB10E |  | PROGRAMMING IN |  | ESC | 2 | 1 | 2 | 0 | 4 | 4 | 2023 | 2023 |  |
|  |  |  | C |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Explain the fundamentals of computer architecture and types of software. | Understand |
| CO 2 |  |  | Develop a solution using algorithm /flowchart to a computational problem. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Construct programs with control statements and arrays. | Apply |
| CO 4 |  |  | Make use of user defined data types or functions to solve computational problems. | Apply |
| CO 5 |  |  | Develop programs using files and pointers. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction 23ESB10E PROGRAMMING IN ESC 2 1 2 0 4 2023 C i. COURSE OVERVIEW This course aims to introduce the concepts of structured programming. It covers basic concepts of the C programming language including arrays, functions, pointers and files. This course involves a lab component which equips the learner to solve computational problems through programming. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Explain the fundamentals of computer architecture and types of CO 1 Understand software. Develop a solution using algorithm /flowchart to a computational CO 2 Apply problem. CO 3 Construct programs with control statements and arrays. Apply Make use of user defined data types or functions to solve CO 4 Apply computational problems. CO 5 Develop programs using files and pointers. Apply iii. SYLLABUS Computer architecture & Programming Languages Basics of Computer architecture, Types of Programming Languages, System Software, Application Software, Introduction to structured programming, Algorithms, Flowcharts and Pseudo-codes. C Programming Language Data Types, variables, keywords, Constants, Operators and Expressions, Control Flow Statements- Conditional statements, Iterative statements, programs. Arrays and Strings Multidimensional arrays and matrices, String processing, Searching and sorting in 1D array. Functions Scope of variable, Pass by reference and value methods, Recursive functions. Structures 17 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 18 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Basics of Computer architecture - Von-Neumann Architecture- Processor, Memory, Input and Output devices. Types of Programming Languages - System Software, Application Software, Compilers, Interpreters, High level and Low level languages. Introduction to structured programming - Algorithm, Flowcharts and Pseudo-code - Examples |  |  | 8 |  |  |
|  |  |  | Familiarization of basic Linux commands |  |  | 2 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 and union, Storage Classes. Pointers and Files- File Operations, Sequential access and random access, programs covering pointers and files, Introduction to data structures, Types of data structure, singly linked list. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. Byron Gottfried, Programming with C (Schaum's Outlines Series), McgrawHill Education, 3rd Edition, 2017. 2. H. M. Deitel, P. J. Deitel, C: How to program, 7th Edition, Pearson Education, 2010. 3. Anita Goel, Computer Fundamentals, Pearson, 1st Edition, 2010. 4. Ellis Horowits, SartajSahini, Susan Anderson Freed, Fundamentals of Data Structure in C, 2ndEdition, 2008. (b) REFERENCES 1. Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie, C Programming Language,Pearson, 2ndEdition, 2015. 2. Rajaraman V, PHI, Computer Basics and Programming in C, 1st Edition, 2007. 3. Anita Goel and Ajay Mittal, Computer fundamentals and Programming in C, 1stEdition,2013. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Basics of Computer architecture - Von-Neumann Architecture- Processor, Memory, Input and Output devices. Types of Programming Languages - System Software, Application Software, Compilers, I Interpreters, High level and Low level languages. Introduction to 8 structured programming - Algorithm, Flowcharts and Pseudo-code - Examples Familiarization of basic Linux commands 2 18 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 19 -->

| II | Basic structure of C program - Character set, Tokens, Identifiers in C, Variables and Data Types, Constants, Console IO Operations, printf and scanf, Operators and Expressions - Expressions, Arithmetic Operators, Relational Operators, Logical Operators, Conditional operator, size of operator, Assignment operators and Bitwise Operators. Operators Precedence. Control Flow Statements - if Statement, if-else Statement, if- else-if Statement. Nested if Statement & switch Statement; Iterative Statements – while, do while & for loops; Unconditional Branching using goto statement, break and continue statements. | 9 |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | Basic programs using data types, operators, and control statements in Java. | 6 |
| III | Arrays – One-dimensional Arrays - Declaration of One-dimensional Arrays, Initialization of One-dimensional Arrays, Example programs- Bubble sort, Linear search; Two-dimensional Arrays - Declaration of Two- dimensional Arrays, Initialization of Two-dimensional Arrays, Example programs-Matrix multiplication and Transpose of a matrix. Character Arrays and Strings – Declaration and Initialization, In-built String handling functions, Example Programs (with and without using built-in functions). | 9 |
|  | Programs on one dimensional & two dimensional arrays, Strings. | 8 |
| IV | Functions - The prototype declaration, Function definition. Function call: Passing arguments to a function, by value, by reference. Scope of variable names. Recursive function calls. Storage Classes. Structure and union in C – Definition, Declaration of Structure Variables, Array of structures. | 8 |
|  | Programs on functions, recursion, structure. | 8 |
| V | Pointers: Pointer variables. Declaring and dereferencing pointer variables. Accessing arrays through pointers. Static & Dynamic memory allocation, Memory allocation functions. File Operations - open, close, read & write. Sequential access and random access to files – rewind(), fseek(), ftell(), feof(), fread() & fwrite(). Simple programs on pointers and files. Introduction to Data Structures – Linear and Non-linear data structures, Singly Linked list. | 11 |
|  | Programs on pointers and files. | 6 |
| Total Hours |  | 75 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Basic structure of C program - Character set, Tokens, Identifiers in C, Variables and Data Types, Constants, Console IO Operations, printf and scanf, Operators and Expressions - Expressions, Arithmetic Operators, Relational Operators, Logical Operators, Conditional operator, size of II operator, Assignment operators and Bitwise Operators. Operators 9 Precedence. Control Flow Statements - if Statement, if-else Statement, if- else-if Statement. Nested if Statement & switch Statement; Iterative Statements – while, do while & for loops; Unconditional Branching using goto statement, break and continue statements. Basic programs using data types, operators, and control statements in 6 Java. Arrays – One-dimensional Arrays - Declaration of One-dimensional Arrays, Initialization of One-dimensional Arrays, Example programs- Bubble sort, Linear search; Two-dimensional Arrays - Declaration of Two- dimensional Arrays, Initialization of Two-dimensional Arrays, Example III 9 programs-Matrix multiplication and Transpose of a matrix. Character Arrays and Strings – Declaration and Initialization, In-built String handling functions, Example Programs (with and without using built-in functions). Programs on one dimensional & two dimensional arrays, Strings. 8 Functions - The prototype declaration, Function definition. Function call: Passing arguments to a function, by value, by reference. Scope of variable IV names. Recursive function calls. Storage Classes. Structure and union in 8 C – Definition, Declaration of Structure Variables, Array of structures. Programs on functions, recursion, structure. 8 Pointers: Pointer variables. Declaring and dereferencing pointer variables. Accessing arrays through pointers. Static & Dynamic memory allocation, Memory allocation functions. File Operations - open, close, read & write. Sequential access and V 11 random access to files – rewind(), fseek(), ftell(), feof(), fread() & fwrite(). Simple programs on pointers and files. Introduction to Data Structures – Linear and Non-linear data structures, Singly Linked list. Programs on pointers and files. 6 Total Hours 75 PROGRAMMING IN C LAB (Practical Part of 23ESB10E) 19 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 20 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 1. Program to read three integer values and find the largest of three numbers. ** 2. Program to check whether a given year is a leap year or not. ** 3. Display the grade of a student after reading his mark for a subject. (Use switch) ** 4. Read a Natural Number and check whether the number is Armstrong or not. ** 5. Read N integers, store t h e m in an array and search for an element in the array using the Linear Search algorithm. ** 6. Read N integers, store them in an array and sort the elements in the array using the Bubble Sort algorithm. ** 7. Write a menu driven program for performing matrix addition, trace of a matrix and transpose of a matrix. ** 8. Read a string (word), store it in an array and check whether it is palindrome or not. 9. Read a string (ending with a $ symbol), store it in an array and count the number of vowels, consonants and spaces in it. ** 10. Program to check whether a number is prime or not using function. ** 11. Program to display the first N elements of Fibonacci series using function. 12. Program to find the product of two matrices. Use function to (i) read a matrix, (ii) finding product and (iii) display matrix ** 13. Program to find the factorial of a number using recursion. ** 14. Program to find the sum of digits of a number using recursion. 15. Using structure, read and print data of n employees (Name, Employee Id and Salary). 16. Read the marks of three subjects for n students of a class and display their names in the order of rank. (Use array of structure) ** 17. Program to swap two numbers without a temporary variable, using pointers. ** 18. Open a text input file and count the number of characters, words and lines in it; and store the results in an output file. ** 19. Open a text file, read an array of integers from the user, write the odd numbers to a file ‘Odd.txt’ and even numbers to another file ‘Even.txt’. ** Note: ** indicates mandatory lab experiments vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 60: 40 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Lab Work : 10 marks Lab Exam : 10 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 60 marks End Semester Examination : 40 marks TOTAL : 100 marks 20 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 21 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 02 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 2 ½ modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 40 • Exam Duration: 2 hours 21 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 22 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23ESL10J |  | BASICS OF ELECTRICAL |  | ESC | 4 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 2 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | ENGINEERING A |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | (Fractal Course) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Apply fundamental circuit laws and principles of electromagnetism to solve simple DC electric circuits and magnetic circuits respectively. | Apply |
| CO 2 |  |  | Solve simple AC circuits using the alternating current fundamentals. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Explain the principle of operation and characteristics of DC Motors | Understand |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction BASICS OF ELECTRICAL 23ESL10J ENGINEERING A ESC 4 0 0 0 2 2023 (Fractal Course) i. COURSE OVERVIEW This course aims to equip the students with an understanding of the fundamental principles of electrical engineering. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Apply fundamental circuit laws and principles of electromagnetism CO 1 to solve simple DC electric circuits and magnetic circuits Apply respectively. CO 2 Solve simple AC circuits using the alternating current fundamentals. Apply CO 3 Explain the principle of operation and characteristics of DC Motors Understand iii. SYLLABUS Basic concepts of DC circuits: Ohm’s Law and Kirchhoff's laws, Star-delta conversion, Analysis of DC circuits, Mesh analysis, Node analysis. Magnetic Circuits: Basic Terminology, Simple Magnetic circuits, Electromagnetic Induction, Faraday's laws, Lenz's law, Self-inductance and mutual inductance. Alternating Current fundamentals: Basic definitions, Average, RMS values, AC Circuits, Phasor representation, Analysis of simple AC circuits (R, L, C, RL, RC, RLC Series circuits) Three phase AC systems, Generation of three phase voltages, star and delta connections. DC Motors-Constructional details of DC machines, Principle of operation, Back EMF, Torque equation, Types, Performance characteristics, Applications. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. William H. Hayt., Jr., Jack E. Kemmerly, Steven M. Durbin., Engineering Circuit 22 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 23 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | DC circuits: Review of Elementary concepts of DC circuits, Current and Voltage Division Rules, Star-delta conversion (resistive networks only- derivation not required), Numerical problems. Analysis of DC circuits: Mesh current method, Node voltage method. Solution of network equations by matrix method, Numerical problems. Magnetic Circuits: Review of Magnetic Circuits, Series magnetic circuits with composite materials, Numerical problems. |  |  | 9 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Electromagnetic Induction: Faraday's laws, Lenz's law, statically induced and dynamically induced emfs, Self-inductance and mutual inductance, coefficient of coupling (derivation not required), Numerical Problems. Alternating Current fundamentals: Generation of alternating voltages, Basic definitions, Average and RMS values of sinusoidal waveforms, Numerical Problems. Analysis of AC Circuits: Phasor representation of sinusoidal quantities, Complex forms, Purely resistive, inductive and capacitive circuits; Analysis |  |  | 9 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 8th Edition, 2012. 2. Kothari D. P. and Nagrath I. J., Basic Electrical Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill, 2010. 3. Fitzgerald A.E., David Higginbotham E., Arvin Grabel, Basic Electrical Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill, 5th Edition, 2009. 4. Bimbra P. S., Electric Machines, Khanna Publishers, 2nd Edition, 2017 (b) REFERENCES 1. Paul Breeze, Power Generation Technologies, Newnes,3rd Edition, 2019. 2. Allan Hambley R., Electrical Engineering: Principles & Applications, Pearson Education, 7th Edition, 2018. Mittle V. N. and Arvind Mittal, Basic Electrical Engineering, McGraw Hill,2nd Edition, 3. 2006. 4. Clayton A. E. and Hancock N. N., The Performance and Design of Direct Current Machines, CBS Publishers & Distributors, New Delhi, 3rd Edition, 2004. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours DC circuits: Review of Elementary concepts of DC circuits, Current and Voltage Division Rules, Star-delta conversion (resistive networks only- derivation not required), Numerical problems. Analysis of DC circuits: Mesh current method, Node voltage method. I 9 Solution of network equations by matrix method, Numerical problems. Magnetic Circuits: Review of Magnetic Circuits, Series magnetic circuits with composite materials, Numerical problems. Electromagnetic Induction: Faraday's laws, Lenz's law, statically induced and dynamically induced emfs, Self-inductance and mutual inductance, coefficient of coupling (derivation not required), Numerical Problems. Alternating Current fundamentals: Generation of alternating voltages, II 9 Basic definitions, Average and RMS values of sinusoidal waveforms, Numerical Problems. Analysis of AC Circuits: Phasor representation of sinusoidal quantities, Complex forms, Purely resistive, inductive and capacitive circuits; Analysis 23 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 24 -->

|  | of RL, RC and RLC series circuits, active, reactive and apparent power. Numerical problems. |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| III | Three phase AC systems: Generation of three phase voltages, advantages of three phase systems, star and delta connections (balanced only), relation between line and phase voltages, line and phase currents, Power in three phase circuits, Numerical problems. DC Machines-Constructional details of DC machines, Principle of operation of DC generator and DC motor, Back EMF, Torque equation, Types, Performance characteristics, Applications. | 12 |
| Total Hours |  | 30 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 of RL, RC and RLC series circuits, active, reactive and apparent power. Numerical problems. Three phase AC systems: Generation of three phase voltages, advantages of three phase systems, star and delta connections (balanced only), relation between line and phase voltages, line and phase currents, Power III 12 in three phase circuits, Numerical problems. DC Machines-Constructional details of DC machines, Principle of operation of DC generator and DC motor, Back EMF, Torque equation, Types, Performance characteristics, Applications. Total Hours 30 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 40: 60 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 40 marks End Semester Examination : 60 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 01 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 3 modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 60 • Exam Duration: 3 hours 24 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 25 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  |  | Categor |  | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  | y |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23ESL10L |  | BASICS OF ELECTRONICS |  | ESC |  |  | 4 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 2 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | ENGINEERING (Fractal |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | Course) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Describe the principles of semiconductor devices, its characteristics and various electronic circuits | Understand |
| CO 2 |  |  | Explain the basic working of Op-Amp, logic gates, radio and cellular communication systems. | Understand |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Categor Year of Course Code Course Name L T P J Credit y Introduction BASICS OF ELECTRONICS 23ESL10L ENGINEERING (Fractal ESC 4 0 0 0 2 2023 Course) i. COURSE OVERVIEW This course aims to equip the students with an understanding of the fundamental principles of electronics and communication engineering. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Describe the principles of semiconductor devices, its characteristics CO 1 Understand and various electronic circuits Explain the basic working of Op-Amp, logic gates, radio and CO 2 Understand cellular communication systems. iii. SYLLABUS PN Junction diode: Principle of operation, V-I characteristics, breakdown mechanisms, Zener diode and its characteristics. Rectifiers and Power supplies: Block diagram of a dc power supply, working of a full wave bridge rectifier, capacitor filter (no analysis), working of simple Zener voltage regulator. Bipolar Junction Transistors: structure, principle of operation, relation between current gains in Common Emitter (CE), Common Base (CB) and Common Collector (CC) configurations, input and output characteristics of CE configuration. Amplifiers: Concept of voltage divider biasing, circuit diagram and working of CE (RC coupled) amplifier with its frequency response. Integrated Circuits: Analog IC; Operational Amplifier, block diagram, ideal characteristics, inverting and non-inverting Amplifier. Digital IC: Logic Gates AND, OR, NOT, Universal Gates; truth table, De-Morgans law, Realization of simple Boolean functions. Radio communication: Modulation, need for modulation, Principle of AM, mathematical expression, waveform, frequency spectrum and bandwidth of AM, Principle of FM, mathematical expression, waveform. 25 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 26 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | PN Junction diode: Principle of operation, V-I characteristics, breakdown mechanisms, Zener diode and its characteristics Rectifiers and Power supplies: Block diagram of a dc power supply, working of a full wave bridge rectifier, capacitor filter (no analysis), working of simple Zener voltage regulator Bipolar Junction Transistors: structure, principle of operation, relation between current gains in Common Emitter (CE), Common Base (CB) and Common Collector (CC) configurations, input and output characteristics of CE configuration. |  |  | 10 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Amplifiers: Concept of voltage divider biasing, circuit diagram and working of CE (RC coupled) amplifier with its frequency response Integrated Circuits: Analog IC; Operational Amplifier, block diagram, ideal characteristics, inverting and non-inverting Amplifier Digital IC: Logic Gates AND, OR, NOT, Universal Gates; truth table, De- Morgans law, Realization of simple Boolean functions |  |  | 10 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Radio Receivers: block diagram of super heterodyne receiver (AM & FM). Mobile communication: Basic principles of cellular communications, concept of cells, frequency reuse, hand off. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. Boylested, R. L. and Nashelsky, L., Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory, Pearson Education, 10thEdition, 2009. 2. Thomas l Floyd, Digital Fundamentals, Pearson Education, 11thEdition, 2018. 3. Ramakant A Gaykwad, Op-Amps and Linear Integrated Circuits, Pearson Education, 4thEdition, 2015. 4. Wayne Tomasi and Neil Storey, A Textbook on Basic Communication and Information Engineering, Pearson, 5thEdition, 2010. (b) REFERENCES N.N. Bhargava , D.C. Kulshreshtha , S.C. Gupta, Basic Electronics and Linear Circuits, Tata 1. McGraw - Hill Education, New Delhi, 2nd Edition, 2014. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours PN Junction diode: Principle of operation, V-I characteristics, breakdown mechanisms, Zener diode and its characteristics Rectifiers and Power supplies: Block diagram of a dc power supply, working of a full wave bridge rectifier, capacitor filter (no analysis), working of simple Zener voltage regulator I 10 Bipolar Junction Transistors: structure, principle of operation, relation between current gains in Common Emitter (CE), Common Base (CB) and Common Collector (CC) configurations, input and output characteristics of CE configuration. Amplifiers: Concept of voltage divider biasing, circuit diagram and working of CE (RC coupled) amplifier with its frequency response Integrated Circuits: Analog IC; Operational Amplifier, block diagram, ideal II 10 characteristics, inverting and non-inverting Amplifier Digital IC: Logic Gates AND, OR, NOT, Universal Gates; truth table, De- Morgans law, Realization of simple Boolean functions 26 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 27 -->

| III | Radio communication: Modulation, need for modulation, Principle of AM, mathematical expression, waveform, frequency spectrum and bandwidth of AM, Principle of FM, mathematical expression, waveform Radio Receivers: block diagram of super heterodyne receiver (AM&FM). Mobile communication: Basic principles of cellular communications, concept of cells, frequency reuse, hand off. | 10 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Total Hours |  | 30 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Radio communication: Modulation, need for modulation, Principle of AM, mathematical expression, waveform, frequency spectrum and bandwidth of AM, Principle of FM, mathematical expression, waveform III Radio Receivers: block diagram of super heterodyne receiver (AM&FM). 10 Mobile communication: Basic principles of cellular communications, concept of cells, frequency reuse, hand off. Total Hours 30 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 40: 60 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 40 marks End Semester Examination : 60 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 01 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 3 modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 60 • Exam Duration: 3 hours 27 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 28 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23ESL1NA |  | ENVIRONMENTAL |  | ESC | 2 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 1 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | SCIENCE |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Identify the problems associated with the overutilization of natural resources and the role of engineers in natural resource management. | Understand |
| CO 2 |  |  | Explain the concepts related to the ecosystem and the significance of ecosystem restoration and biodiversity conservation. | Understand |
| CO 3 |  |  | Explain the causes, impacts and control measures of various types of environmental pollution. | Understand |
| CO 4 |  |  | Summarize the various legal provisions for environmental protection. | Understand |
| CO 5 |  |  | Discuss the concepts of sustainability and sustainable practices by utilizing engineering knowledge and principles. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction ENVIRONMENTAL 23ESL1NA ESC 2 0 0 0 1 2023 SCIENCE i. COURSE OVERVIEW Goal of this course is to expose students to the significance of natural resource management, ecosystem restoration and biodiversity conservation. The course details the various problems related to environmental pollution and the legal provisions for environmental protection. The course also introduces the concept of sustainability, sustainable practices and the role of engineering in attaining sustainable development. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Identify the problems associated with the overutilization of natural CO 1 Understand resources and the role of engineers in natural resource management. Explain the concepts related to the ecosystem and the significance CO 2 Understand of ecosystem restoration and biodiversity conservation. Explain the causes, impacts and control measures of various types CO 3 Understand of environmental pollution. Summarize the various legal provisions for environmental CO 4 Understand protection. Discuss the concepts of sustainability and sustainable practices by CO 5 utilizing engineering knowledge and principles. Apply iii. SYLLABUS Interdisciplinary nature of environmental science: Scope and importance Natural resources and associated problems: Water resources, Energy resources, Food resources, Land resources Ecosystems: Concept, Types, Functions, Productivity, Energy flow and Food chains of ecosystems. Characteristic features and functions of Forest ecosystem, Grassland ecosystem, Desert ecosystem, Aquatic ecosystem, Ecosystem Services Biodiversity and its conservation: Species and ecosystem diversity, Value of biodiversity, Hotspots of biodiversity, Threats to biodiversity, Conservation of biodiversity Environmental Pollution: Air, Water and Soil pollution. Solid and Hazardous Waste Management, 28 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 29 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Interdisciplinary nature of Environment: Definition, scope and importance. Natural resources and associated problems: Water resources: Use and over-utilization of surface and ground water, floods, drought, conflicts over water. Energy resources: Growing energy needs, renewable and non-renewable energy sources, use of alternate energy sources (case studies). Food Resources: effects of modern agriculture, fertilizers pesticides problems, water logging, salinity. Land resources: land degradation, man induced landslides, soil erosion and desertification. Role of individuals in conservation of natural resources, Equitable use of resources. |  |  | 6 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Role of individuals in prevention of pollution Social issues and the environment: Environmental ethics, Contemporary Environmental issues, Water conservation- rainwater harvesting, watershed management, conservation of wetlands, Legal provisions for environmental protection. Sustainability: Concept, Sustainable Development Goals. Sustainability Practices- Green Engineering, Sustainable habitat- Green buildings, Sustainable Urbanization, Industrial Ecology, Circular Economy- Case studies iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. Erach Bharucha, Textbook for Environmental Studies, 3rd edition, UGC, New Delhi, 2021. 2. D. D. Mishra, Fundamental Concepts in Environmental Studies, 4th edition, S. Chand & Co. Ltd., 2014. 3. Kurian Joseph and R. Nagendran, Essentials of Environmental Studies, Pearson Education Pvt. Ltd, India, 2017. 4. David Allen and David R. Shonnard, Sustainable Engineering: Concepts, Design and Case Studies, 1st edition, Pearson, 2011. (b) REFERENCES Suresh K. Dhameja, Environmental Engineering and Management, 4th edition, S.K. 1. Kataria & Sons, 2021. 2. Bradley Striebig, Adebayo A. Ogundipe and Maria Papadakis, Engineering Applications in Sustainable Design and Development, 1st edition, Cengage Learning, EMEA, 2015. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Interdisciplinary nature of Environment: Definition, scope and importance. Natural resources and associated problems: Water resources: Use and over-utilization of surface and ground water, floods, drought, conflicts over water. Energy resources: Growing energy needs, renewable and non-renewable I energy sources, use of alternate energy sources (case studies). 6 Food Resources: effects of modern agriculture, fertilizers pesticides problems, water logging, salinity. Land resources: land degradation, man induced landslides, soil erosion and desertification. Role of individuals in conservation of natural resources, Equitable use of resources. 29 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 30 -->

| II | Ecosystems: Concept of an ecosystem, Structure and function of an ecosystem. Productivity, Energy flow in the ecosystems. Ecological succession. Food chains, food webs and ecological pyramids. Introduction, Types of ecosystems, Characteristic features and function of the following ecosystems: Forest ecosystem, Grassland ecosystem, Desert ecosystem, Aquatic ecosystem, Ecosystem services. Biodiversity and its Conservation: Introduction-Definition: species and ecosystem diversity. Value of biodiversity: consumptive use, productive use, social, ethical, aesthetic values. Hotspots of biodiversity, Threats to biodiversity: habitat loss, poaching of wildlife, man wildlife conflicts. Endangered and endemic species of India. Conservation of biodiversity. | 6 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| III | Environmental Pollution: Definition, Causes, effects and control measures of: Air pollution, Water pollution, Soil pollution, Noise pollution. Solid and Hazardous waste management: Causes, effects and control measures of urban and industrial wastes. 3R concept, Zero waste management -case studies. Role of an individual in prevention of pollution. | 6 |
| IV | Social issues and the Environment: Environmental ethics, Contemporary Environmental issues- Global warming, Climate change, Sea level rise. International efforts for environmental protection. Water conservation - rain water harvesting, watershed management, conservation of wetlands- Ramsar sites in India. Legal provisions for environmental protection. Environment protection Act, Air (prevention and control of pollution) Act, Water (prevention and control of pollution) Act, Wildlife protection act, Forest conservation act. National Action Plan on Climate Change | 6 |
| V | Sustainability: Introduction, Need and concept of sustainability, Evolution of sustainability, Social, Environmental and Economic sustainability. Sustainable development, Nexus between technology and sustainable development, Challenges for sustainable development, Sustainable Development Goals Sustainability Practices- Green engineering, Sustainable habitat-basic concepts, Green buildings, Green materials for building constructions, Green building certification, Methods of increasing the energy efficiency of buildings, Sustainable Urbanisation, Industrial Ecology, Circular Economy- Case studies. | 6 |
| Total Hours |  | 30 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Ecosystems: Concept of an ecosystem, Structure and function of an ecosystem. Productivity, Energy flow in the ecosystems. Ecological succession. Food chains, food webs and ecological pyramids. Introduction, Types of ecosystems, Characteristic features and function of the following ecosystems: Forest ecosystem, Grassland ecosystem, Desert ecosystem, Aquatic ecosystem, Ecosystem services. II 6 Biodiversity and its Conservation: Introduction-Definition: species and ecosystem diversity. Value of biodiversity: consumptive use, productive use, social, ethical, aesthetic values. Hotspots of biodiversity, Threats to biodiversity: habitat loss, poaching of wildlife, man wildlife conflicts. Endangered and endemic species of India. Conservation of biodiversity. Environmental Pollution: Definition, Causes, effects and control measures of: Air pollution, Water pollution, Soil pollution, Noise pollution. Solid and Hazardous waste management: Causes, effects and control III measures of urban and industrial wastes. 3R concept, Zero waste 6 management -case studies. Role of an individual in prevention of pollution. Social issues and the Environment: Environmental ethics, Contemporary Environmental issues- Global warming, Climate change, Sea level rise. International efforts for environmental protection. Water conservation - rain water harvesting, watershed management, conservation of wetlands- Ramsar sites in India. IV 6 Legal provisions for environmental protection. Environment protection Act, Air (prevention and control of pollution) Act, Water (prevention and control of pollution) Act, Wildlife protection act, Forest conservation act. National Action Plan on Climate Change Sustainability: Introduction, Need and concept of sustainability, Evolution of sustainability, Social, Environmental and Economic sustainability. Sustainable development, Nexus between technology and sustainable development, Challenges for sustainable development, Sustainable Development Goals V 6 Sustainability Practices- Green engineering, Sustainable habitat-basic concepts, Green buildings, Green materials for building constructions, Green building certification, Methods of increasing the energy efficiency of buildings, Sustainable Urbanisation, Industrial Ecology, Circular Economy- Case studies. Total Hours 30 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 100: 0 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks 30 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 31 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Assignments(Activity based) : 15 marks Course Based Tasks i) Mini Project : 30 marks ii) Case Study : 20 marks Assessment Through Tests : 30 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 100 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 01 (At the end of the semester) • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 5 modules 31 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 32 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit | Year of Introduction |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 23PYP10A | ENGINEERING PHYSICS LAB |  | BSC | 0 | 0 | 2 | 0 | 1 | 2023 |  |

|  | Course Outcomes | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CO 1 |  | Determine the frequency of tuning fork using a Melde’s string apparatus by setting up wave pattern in a stretched string. | Apply |
| CO 2 |  | Determine the Numerical aperture and acceptance angle of optical fiber. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  | Determine the wavelength of a monochromatic beam of light and thickness of thin wire using principle of interference | Apply |
| CO 4 |  | Demonstrate diffraction of light using plane transmission grating. | Apply |
| CO 5 |  | Draw the I-V characteristics of non ohmic devices. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction ENGINEERING 23PYP10A BSC 0 0 2 0 1 2023 PHYSICS LAB i. COURSE OVERVIEW The aim of this course is to enable the students to gain practical knowledge in Physics to correlate with the theoretical studies. It equips the students to utilize the acquired skills in an appropriate way to explore the prospects of modern technology. It brings more confidence in students and develop the ability to fabricate engineering and technical tools ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Determine the frequency of tuning fork using a Melde’s string CO 1 Apply apparatus by setting up wave pattern in a stretched string. Determine the Numerical aperture and acceptance angle of optical CO 2 Apply fiber. Determine the wavelength of a monochromatic beam of light and CO 3 Apply thickness of thin wire using principle of interference CO 4 Demonstrate diffraction of light using plane transmission grating. Apply CO 5 Draw the I-V characteristics of non ohmic devices. Apply iii. SYLLABUS 1. Melde’s string apparatus- Measurement of frequency in the transverse mode. 2. Wavelength measurement of a monochromatic source of light using Newton’s Rings method 3. Determination of diameter of a thin wire or thickness of a thin strip of paper using air wedge method. 4. Measurement of wavelength of a source of light using grating. 5. Determination of dispersive power and resolving power of a plane transmission grating. 6. Determination of the wavelength of any standard laser using diffraction grating. 7. I-V characteristics of solar cell. 8. To measure the Numerical aperture and acceptance angle of an optical fibre. 32 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 33 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 iv. REFERENCES 1. S.L. Gupta and V. Kumar, Practical physics with viva voce, Pragati Prakashan Publishers, Revised Edition, 2009.. 2. M.N. Avadhanulu, A.A. Dani and Pokely P.M., Experiments in Engineering Physics, S. Chand &Co, 2008. 3. S. K. Gupta, Engineering Physics practicals, Krishna Prakashan Pvt. Ltd., 2014 4) P. R. Sasikumar, Practical Physics, PHI Ltd., 2011. v. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assessment of Lab Work : 55 marks Continuous Assessment in Lab (Lab work + Record + Viva - voce) -40 marks and Internal Lab test -15 marks Final Lab Assessment : 40 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vi. FINAL ASSESSMENT (WRITTEN EXAMINATION) • Maximum Marks: 40 • Test Duration: 1 hour 33 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 34 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of Introduction |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 23ESP10B |  | ELECTRICAL AND |  | ESC | 0 | 0 | 2 | 0 | 1 | 2023 |  |
|  |  | ELECTRONICS |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | WORKSHOP |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

| Course Outcomes |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CO 1 |  | Choose the appropriate tools, electrical accessories, protective elements for electrical wiring and study the different types of earthing and safety measures. | Remember |
| CO 2 |  | Build a simple lighting circuit for domestic buildings using suitable accessories and materials. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  | Identify the faults in electric circuits and batteries using appropriate devices. | Apply |
| CO 4 |  | Make use of a solar powered circuit and obtain its VI characteristics. | Apply |
| CO 5 |  | Construct the performance characteristics of DC Motors by performing load test. | Apply |
| CO 6 |  | Test various electronic components. | Apply |
| CO 7 |  | Implement basic electronic circuits on breadboard. | Apply |
| CO 8 |  | Implement basic electronic circuits on general purpose PCB. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction ELECTRICAL AND 23ESP10B ELECTRONICS ESC 0 0 2 0 1 2023 WORKSHOP i. COURSE OVERVIEW To expose the students to the commonly used accessories and components in electrical installations and to provide hands on experience of wiring of electrical circuits. To enable the students to familiarize, identify, construct, and debug the electronic components, devices and circuits. It also enables the student’s engineering skills by soldering practices of electronic circuits. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Choose the appropriate tools, electrical accessories, protective CO 1 elements for electrical wiring and study the different types of Remember earthing and safety measures. Build a simple lighting circuit for domestic buildings using suitable CO 2 Apply accessories and materials. Identify the faults in electric circuits and batteries using appropriate CO 3 Apply devices. CO 4 Make use of a solar powered circuit and obtain its VI characteristics. Apply Construct the performance characteristics of DC Motors by CO 5 Apply performing load test. CO 6 Test various electronic components. Apply CO 7 Implement basic electronic circuits on breadboard. Apply CO 8 Implement basic electronic circuits on general purpose PCB. Apply iii. SYLLABUS 34 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 35 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
|  | ELECTRICAL WORKSHOP |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 1. |  |  | Familiarization/Identification of electrical components with specification (Functionality, type, size, colour coding, symbol, cost etc. of Wires, Cables, Connectors, Fuses, MCB, ELCB, Switches and other electrical installation equipments with ratings). |  |  | 2 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Part A: Electrical Workshop Familiarization/Identification of electrical accessories and protective elements, wiring of circuits using PVC conduits, wiring of simple solar chargeable circuit and determination of its characteristics, Demonstration of power distribution arrangement and earthing schemes, Identification of different types of batteries. Part B: Electronics Workshop Familiarization of electronic equipment and commonly used tools Familiarization and testing of electronic components Interconnection using bread board a. Diode Characteristics b. Single stage RC coupled Amplifier c. Truth table verification of Logic Gates Soldering Practice a. DC Power Supply b. Inverting and Non Inverting amplifier using Op-amp iv. REFERENCES 1. Singh R. P., Electrical Workshop: Safety, Commissioning, Maintenance & Testing of Electrical Equipment, Dream tech Press, 3rd Edition, 2019. 2. John H. Watt, Terrell Croft American Electricians' Handbook: A Reference Book for the Practical Electrical Manual, McGraw-Hill, 9th Edition, 2002. 3. Navas K A, Electronics Lab Manual, , Volume 1, PHI Learning Private Limited, 5th Edition, 2015. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours ELECTRICAL WORKSHOP Familiarization/Identification of electrical components with specification (Functionality, type, size, colour coding, symbol, cost etc. of Wires, Cables, 1. 2 Connectors, Fuses, MCB, ELCB, Switches and other electrical installation equipments with ratings). 35 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 36 -->

| 2. | Understand the safety precautions to be observed in the workshop. Demonstration of usage of fire extinguishers and learn about basic first aid procedures. | 1 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 3. | Wiring of one lamp controlled by one SPST switch and a plug socket (PVC conduit wiring). | 2 |
| 4. | Wiring of light/fan circuit controlled by two SPDT switches (Staircase wiring). | 2 |
| 5. | Wiring of a light circuit and a power circuit for domestic applications. | 2 |
| 6. | Wiring of simple solar chargeable circuit and determination of its characteristics. | 2 |
| 7. | a) Demonstration of power distribution arrangement using single phase MCB distribution board with ELCB, main switch and Energy meter. b) Application of tester and test lamp for identifying simple faults in electrical systems. | 1 |
| 8. | a) Demonstration of Pipe and Plate Earthing Schemes. b) Testing of batteries using hydrometer. | 1 |
| 9. | Load Test on a DC Shunt/Series Motor | 2 |
| ELECTRONICS WORKSHOP |  |  |
| 1. | Familiarization of electronic equipment and commonly used tools | 2 |
| 2. | Familiarization and testing of electronic components | 2 |
| 3. | Interconnection using bread board a. Diode Characteristics b. Single stage RC coupled Amplifier c. Truth table verification of Logic Gates | 6 |
| 4. | Soldering Practice a. DC Power Supply b. Inverting and Non Inverting amplifier using Op-amp | 5 |
| Total Hours |  | 30 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Understand the safety precautions to be observed in the workshop. 2. Demonstration of usage of fire extinguishers and learn about basic first aid 1 procedures. Wiring of one lamp controlled by one SPST switch and a plug socket (PVC 3. 2 conduit wiring). Wiring of light/fan circuit controlled by two SPDT switches (Staircase 4. 2 wiring). 5. Wiring of a light circuit and a power circuit for domestic applications. 2 Wiring of simple solar chargeable circuit and determination of its 6. 2 characteristics. a) Demonstration of power distribution arrangement using single phase MCB distribution board with ELCB, main switch and Energy meter. 7. 1 b) Application of tester and test lamp for identifying simple faults in electrical systems. a) Demonstration of Pipe and Plate Earthing Schemes. 8. 1 b) Testing of batteries using hydrometer. 9. Load Test on a DC Shunt/Series Motor 2 ELECTRONICS WORKSHOP 1. Familiarization of electronic equipment and commonly used tools 2 2. Familiarization and testing of electronic components 2 Interconnection using bread board a. Diode Characteristics 3. 6 b. Single stage RC coupled Amplifier c. Truth table verification of Logic Gates Soldering Practice 4. a. DC Power Supply 5 b. Inverting and Non Inverting amplifier using Op-amp Total Hours 30 36 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 37 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assessment of Lab Work : 55 marks Continuous Assessment in Lab (Lab work + Record + Viva - voce) -40 marks and Internal Lab test -15 marks Final Lab Assessment : 40 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. FINAL ASSESSMENT (WRITTEN EXAMINATION) • Maximum Marks: 40 • Test Duration: 1 hour 37 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 38 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 SEMESTER II 38 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 39 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23MAL10B |  | VECTOR CALCULUS, |  | BSC | 3 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 4 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | DIFFERENTIAL |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | EQUATIONS AND |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | TRANSFORMS |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Compute the derivatives and line integrals of vector functions and learn their applications. | Apply |
| CO 2 |  |  | Evaluate surface and volume integrals and learn their inter- relations and applications. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Solve linear ordinary differential equations. | Apply |
| CO 4 |  |  | Apply Laplace transform to solve ODEs arising in engineering. | Apply |
| CO 5 |  |  | Apply Fourier transforms of functions to solve problems arising in engineering. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction VECTOR CALCULUS, DIFFERENTIAL 23MAL10B BSC 3 1 0 0 4 2023 EQUATIONS AND TRANSFORMS i. COURSE OVERVIEW The objective of this course is to familiarize the prospective engineers with some advanced concepts and methods in Mathematics which include the Calculus of vector valued functions, ordinary differential equations and basic transforms such as Laplace and Fourier Transforms which are invaluable for any engineer’s mathematical tool box. The topics treated in this course have applications in all branches of engineering. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Compute the derivatives and line integrals of vector functions and CO 1 Apply learn their applications. Evaluate surface and volume integrals and learn their inter- relations CO 2 Apply and applications. CO 3 Solve linear ordinary differential equations. Apply CO 4 Apply Laplace transform to solve ODEs arising in engineering. Apply Apply Fourier transforms of functions to solve problems arising in CO 5 Apply engineering. iii. SYLLABUS Vector Calculus – Derivative of vector function, Gradient, Divergence, Curl, Line integral, conservative fields. Green's theorem, surface integral, Gauss divergence theorem, Stokes' theorem. Ordinary Differential Equations – Homogeneous and Non-Homogeneous linear differential Equations, Euler-Cauchy equations. Method of undetermined coefficients and Method of variation of parameters. 39 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 40 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Calculus of vector functions: Vector valued function of single variable, derivative of vector function and geometrical interpretation, motion along a curve-velocity, speed and acceleration. Concept of scalar and vector fields, Gradient and its properties, directional derivative, divergence and curl, Line integrals of vector fields, work as line integral, Conservative vector fields, independence of path and potential function (results without proof). |  |  | 12 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Vector integral theorems: Green’s theorem (for simply connected domains, without proof) and applications to evaluating line integrals and finding areas. Surface integrals over surfaces of the form z = g(x, y), y = g(x, z) or x = g(y, z) , Flux integrals over surfaces of the form z = g(x, y), y = g(x, z) or x = g(y, z), divergence theorem (without proof) and its applications to finding flux integrals, Stokes’ theorem (without proof) and its applications to finding line integrals of vector fields and work done. |  |  | 12 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Laplace transforms – Laplace Transform and its inverse, shifting theorems, Laplace transform of derivatives and integrals, solution of differential equations using Laplace transform, Unit step function. Dirac delta function. Convolution theorem and its applications. Fourier Transforms – Fourier integral representation, Fourier sine and cosine integrals. Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform. Fourier sine and cosine transforms, inverse sine and cosine transform. Convolution theorem iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. H. Anton, I. Biven S.Davis, “Calculus”, Wiley, 10th edition, 2015. 2. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 10th Edition, John Wiley & (b) REFERENCES George F Simmons: Differential Equation with Applications and its historical Notes,2e 1. McGraw Hill Education India 2002. 2. Hemen Datta, Mathematical Methods for Science and Engineering, CengageLearing,1st. ed. 3. H. Anton, I. Biven, S. Davis, “Calculus”, Wiley, 10th Edition, 2015. 4. B.S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publishers, 44th Edition, 2018 v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Calculus of vector functions: Vector valued function of single variable, derivative of vector function and geometrical interpretation, motion along a curve-velocity, speed and acceleration. Concept of scalar and vector I fields, Gradient and its properties, directional derivative, divergence and 12 curl, Line integrals of vector fields, work as line integral, Conservative vector fields, independence of path and potential function (results without proof). Vector integral theorems: Green’s theorem (for simply connected domains, without proof) and applications to evaluating line integrals and finding areas. Surface integrals over surfaces of the form z = g(x, y), y = g(x, z) or II x = g(y, z) , Flux integrals over surfaces of the form z = g(x, y), y = g(x, z) 12 or x = g(y, z), divergence theorem (without proof) and its applications to finding flux integrals, Stokes’ theorem (without proof) and its applications to finding line integrals of vector fields and work done. 40 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 41 -->

| III | Ordinary differential equations: Homogenous linear differential equation of second order, superposition principle, general solution, homogenous linear ODEs with constant coefficients-general solution. Solution of Euler- Cauchy equations (second order only). Existence and uniqueness (without proof). Non homogenous linear ODEs-general solution, solution by the method of undetermined coefficients (for the right-hand side of the form 𝑥n, 𝑒kx, 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑥, 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑥, 𝑒kx𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑥, 𝑒kxcos𝑎𝑥 and their linear combinations), methods of variation of parameters. Solution of higher order equations- homogeneous and non-homogeneous with constant coefficient using method of undetermined coefficient. | 12 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| IV | Laplace transforms: Laplace Transform and its inverse ,Existence theorem ( without proof) , linearity, Laplace transform of basic functions, first shifting theorem, Laplace transform of derivatives and integrals, solution of differential equations using Laplace transform, Unit step function, Second shifting theorems. Dirac delta function and its Laplace transform, Solution of ordinary differential equation involving unit step function and Dirac delta functions. Convolution theorem (without proof) and its application to finding inverse Laplace transform of products of functions. | 12 |
| V | Fourier Transforms: Fourier integral representation, Fourier sine and cosine integrals. Fourier sine and cosine transforms, inverse sine and cosine transform. Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform, basic properties. The Fourier transform of derivatives. Convolution theorem (without proof). | 12 |
| Total Hours |  | 60 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Ordinary differential equations: Homogenous linear differential equation of second order, superposition principle, general solution, homogenous linear ODEs with constant coefficients-general solution. Solution of Euler- Cauchy equations (second order only). Existence and uniqueness (without proof). Non homogenous linear ODEs-general solution, solution by the III 12 method of undetermined coefficients (for the right-hand side of the form 𝑥n, 𝑒kx, 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑥, 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑥, 𝑒kx𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑥, 𝑒kxcos𝑎𝑥 and their linear combinations), methods of variation of parameters. Solution of higher order equations- homogeneous and non-homogeneous with constant coefficient using method of undetermined coefficient. Laplace transforms: Laplace Transform and its inverse ,Existence theorem ( without proof) , linearity, Laplace transform of basic functions, first shifting theorem, Laplace transform of derivatives and integrals, solution of differential equations using Laplace transform, Unit step function, Second IV 12 shifting theorems. Dirac delta function and its Laplace transform, Solution of ordinary differential equation involving unit step function and Dirac delta functions. Convolution theorem (without proof) and its application to finding inverse Laplace transform of products of functions. Fourier Transforms: Fourier integral representation, Fourier sine and cosine integrals. Fourier sine and cosine transforms, inverse sine and cosine V transform. Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform, basic 12 properties. The Fourier transform of derivatives. Convolution theorem (without proof). Total Hours 60 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 40: 60 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 40 marks End Semester Examination : 60 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 02 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 2 ½ modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 60 • Exam Duration: 3 hours 41 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 42 -->

| Course Code |  | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23CYL10A | 23CYL10A |  | ENGINEERING |  | BSC | 3 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 4 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  |  | CHEMISTRY |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Apply the basic concepts of Electrochemistry in various Engineering problems. | Apply |
| CO 2 |  |  | Apply the basic concepts of UV-Visible, IR and NMR spectroscopic techniques to analyze organic compounds. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Explain the significance of conducting polymers, Nanomaterials, Alloys and composite materials in Engineering. | Understand |
| CO 4 |  |  | Explain relevant techniques used for the identification and separation of chemical compounds and mixtures. | Understand |
| CO 5 |  |  | Explain the principles of Green chemistry and various water treatment methods used for sustainability. | Understand |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction ENGINEERING 23CYL10A BSC 3 1 0 0 4 2023 CHEMISTRY i. COURSE OVERVIEW The aim of the Engineering Chemistry program is to expose the students to basic concepts of chemistry and its Industrial as well as Engineering applications. It also let the students to familiarize with different topics such as new-generation engineering materials, storage devices, different instrumental methods etc. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Apply the basic concepts of Electrochemistry in various CO 1 Apply Engineering problems. Apply the basic concepts of UV-Visible, IR and NMR CO 2 Apply spectroscopic techniques to analyze organic compounds. Explain the significance of conducting polymers, Nanomaterials, CO 3 Understand Alloys and composite materials in Engineering. Explain relevant techniques used for the identification and CO 4 Understand separation of chemical compounds and mixtures. Explain the principles of Green chemistry and various water CO 5 Understand treatment methods used for sustainability. iii. SYLLABUS Electrochemistry: Cell prototype- Daniel cell, Nernst equation and its uses, Primary and secondary electrodes- construction and working, applications of electrochemical series. Potentiometric titration – Acid Base titration, Fundamentals of corrosion, Galvanic series, Wet and dry corrosion – types, mechanism and its prevention. Electrochemical power sources: different types of cells, construction, working and applications– Dry cell, Electrolytic cells, Galvanic cells, Lead-acid cell, accumulator, Lithium ion cell- different electrode materials, Fuel cells, H -O fuel cell. 2 2 Basics of Spectroscopy: Beer Lambert’s law, Principles and applications of UV-Visible 42 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 43 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 spectroscopy, Fluorescence and its applications, Woodward-Feiser rule, instrumentation of UV- Visible spectroscope, colorimetry, Principles and applications of IR spectroscopy, Number of vibrational modes – CO and H O, Determination of force constant of diatomic molecules, 2 2 Principles and applications of NMR spectroscopy, Shielding, Deshielding, Chemical shift, spin- spin splitting, MRI technique. Engineering Materials: Basics of Polymer chemistry, Types of copolymers, Preparation, properties and applications- Butadiene Styrene, Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene, Kevlar, conducting polymers- Polyaniline and Polypyrrole - preparation properties and applications, Organic Light Emitting Diode Nanomaterials: Origin of nanomaterials, Classifications, Chemical synthesis- hydrolysis and reduction, Carbon Nano Tubes, Graphene, Quantum dots-applications. Alloys and Composites: Cast iron, Principal non-ferrous alloys, need, properties and applications of composites, super alloys, Ceramics- structure and applications. Instrumental methods in chemistry: Thermal methods, Thermo Gravimetric Analysis, Differential Thermal Analysis, Chromatography techniques- Thin Layer Chromatography, Column Chromatography, Gas Chromatography, High Performance Liquid Chromatography, Surface characterization using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy(XPS), Auger Electron Spectroscopy(AES). Green Chemistry and Sustainability: Green chemistry – Principles, Matrices to express greenness- E-Factor, Atom Economy, Environmental Quotient, Green chemistry and Catalysis, R M Models-Econoburette, Survismeter, E-waste disposal, Life Cycle Analysis, Benefits and 4 4 limitations of conducting Life Cycle Analysis. Water Technology: Water characteristics, hardness, disadvantages of hard water, Estimation of hardness- EDTA method, Ion exchange process for water softening, Dissolved Oxygen, Biological Oxygen Demand and Chemical Oxygen Demand, its estimation and significance, Municipal water treatment, disinfection of water, Reverse Osmosis, Sewage water treatment. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. D. Harvey, N. Rutledge, Industrial Chemistry, ETP, first edition, 2018. ISBN: 9781788820554 2. M. Arif, A. Fernandez, K. P. Nair, Engineering Chemistry, first edition, Owl Books, 2019. 3. S. Chawla, A text book of Engineering Chemistry, second edition, Dhanpat Rai & Co. 2017. 4. Roy Varghese., Engineering Chemistry, Second Edition, Crown Pubs., 2019. 43 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 44 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Electrochemistry: Cell prototype- Daniel cell, Nernst equation and its uses, Primary and secondary electrodes- construction and working, applications of electrochemical series. Potentiometric titration – Acid Base titration, Fundamentals of corrosion, Galvanic series, Wet and dry corrosion – types, mechanism and its prevention. Electrochemical power sources: different types of cells, construction, working and applications– Dry cell, Electrolytic cells, Galvanic cells, Lead-acid cell, accumulator, Lithium ion cell- different electrode materials, Fuel cells, H -O fuel cell. 2 2 |  |  | 12 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Basics of Spectroscopy: Beer Lambert’s law, Principles and applications of UV-Visible spectroscopy, Fluorescence and its applications, Woodward-Feiser rule, instrumentation of UV- Visible spectroscope, colorimetry, Principles and applications of IR spectroscopy, Number of vibrational modes – CO 2 and H 2 O, Determination of force constant of diatomic molecules, Principles and applications of NMR spectroscopy, Shielding, Deshielding, Chemical shift, spin- spin splitting, MRI technique. |  |  | 12 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 5. Prasanta Rath., Engineering Chemistry, First Edition, Cenage Learning, 2015. (b) REFERENCES 1. C. N. Banwell, E. M. Mc Cash, Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, McGraw- Hill, 4th edition, 2017. 2. H. H. Willard, L. L. Merritt, Instrumental Methods of Analysis, CBS Publishers, 7th edition, 2023. 3. A. J. Peacock, A. Calhoun, C. Hanser, Polymer Chemistry: Properties and Application, Verlag GmbH and Company KG, 2012. 4. C. Binns, Introduction to Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Wiley, 2010. 5. Callister William.D., Material Science and Engineering, John Wiley, 2014. Jurgen Garche, Tom Smolinka, Electrochemical Power Sources- Fundamentals, 6. Systems, and Applications, Elsevier Science, Second edition, 2021. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Electrochemistry: Cell prototype- Daniel cell, Nernst equation and its uses, Primary and secondary electrodes- construction and working, applications of electrochemical series. Potentiometric titration – Acid Base titration, Fundamentals of corrosion, Galvanic series, Wet and I dry corrosion – types, mechanism and its prevention. 12 Electrochemical power sources: different types of cells, construction, working and applications– Dry cell, Electrolytic cells, Galvanic cells, Lead-acid cell, accumulator, Lithium ion cell- different electrode materials, Fuel cells, H -O fuel cell. 2 2 Basics of Spectroscopy: Beer Lambert’s law, Principles and applications of UV-Visible spectroscopy, Fluorescence and its applications, Woodward-Feiser rule, instrumentation of UV- Visible spectroscope, colorimetry, Principles and applications of IR II spectroscopy, Number of vibrational modes – CO 2 and H 2 O, 12 Determination of force constant of diatomic molecules, Principles and applications of NMR spectroscopy, Shielding, Deshielding, Chemical shift, spin- spin splitting, MRI technique. 44 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 45 -->

| III | Engineering Materials: Basics of Polymer chemistry, Types of copolymers, Preparation, properties and applications- Butadiene Styrene, Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene, Kevlar, conducting polymers- Polyaniline and Polypyrrole - preparation properties and applications, Organic Light Emitting Diode Nanomaterials: Origin of nanomaterials, Classifications, Chemical synthesis- hydrolysis and reduction, Carbon Nano Tubes, Graphene, Quantum dots-applications. Alloys and Composites: Cast iron, Principal non-ferrous alloys, need, properties and applications of composites, super alloys, Ceramics- structure and applications. | 12 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| IV | Instrumental methods in chemistry: Thermal methods, Thermo Gravimetric Analysis, Differential Thermal Analysis, Chromatography techniques- Thin Layer Chromatography, Column Chromatography, Gas Chromatography, High Performance Liquid Chromatography, Surface characterization using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy(XPS), Auger Electron Spectroscopy(AES). | 12 |
| V | Green Chemistry and Sustainability: Green chemistry – Principles, Matrices to express greenness- E-Factor, Atom Economy, Environmental Quotient, Green chemistry and Catalysis, R 4 M 4 Models- Econoburette, Survismeter, E-waste disposal, Life Cycle Analysis, Benefits and limitations of conducting Life Cycle Analysis. Water Technology: Water characteristics, hardness, disadvantages of hard water, Estimation of hardness- EDTA method, Ion exchange process for water softening, Dissolved Oxygen, Biological Oxygen Demand and Chemical Oxygen Demand, its estimation and significance, Municipal water treatment, disinfection of water, Reverse Osmosis, Sewage water treatment. | 12 |
| Total Hours |  | 60 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Engineering Materials: Basics of Polymer chemistry, Types of copolymers, Preparation, properties and applications- Butadiene Styrene, Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene, Kevlar, conducting polymers- Polyaniline and Polypyrrole - preparation properties and applications, Organic Light Emitting Diode III Nanomaterials: Origin of nanomaterials, Classifications, Chemical 12 synthesis- hydrolysis and reduction, Carbon Nano Tubes, Graphene, Quantum dots-applications. Alloys and Composites: Cast iron, Principal non-ferrous alloys, need, properties and applications of composites, super alloys, Ceramics- structure and applications. Instrumental methods in chemistry: Thermal methods, Thermo Gravimetric Analysis, Differential Thermal Analysis, Chromatography techniques- Thin Layer Chromatography, Column IV Chromatography, Gas Chromatography, High Performance Liquid 12 Chromatography, Surface characterization using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy(XPS), Auger Electron Spectroscopy(AES). Green Chemistry and Sustainability: Green chemistry – Principles, Matrices to express greenness- E-Factor, Atom Economy, Environmental Quotient, Green chemistry and Catalysis, R 4 M 4 Models- Econoburette, Survismeter, E-waste disposal, Life Cycle Analysis, Benefits and limitations of conducting Life Cycle Analysis. V Water Technology: Water characteristics, hardness, disadvantages of 12 hard water, Estimation of hardness- EDTA method, Ion exchange process for water softening, Dissolved Oxygen, Biological Oxygen Demand and Chemical Oxygen Demand, its estimation and significance, Municipal water treatment, disinfection of water, Reverse Osmosis, Sewage water treatment. Total Hours 60 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 40: 60 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 40 marks End Semester Examination : 60 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST 45 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 46 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 • No. of Tests: 02 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 2 ½ modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 60 • Exam Duration: 3 hours 46 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 47 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23ESB10A |  | ENGINEERING |  | ESC | 2 | 0 | 2 | 0 | 3 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | GRAPHICS |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Construct the orthographic projection of points and lines located in different quadrants. | Apply |
| CO 2 |  |  | Prepare orthographic projection of solids by visualizing them in different positions. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Prepare multiview projection and solid models of objects using CAD tools. | Apply |
| CO 4 |  |  | Prepare assembly drawing of objects using CAD tools. | Apply |
| CO 5 |  |  | Construct drawings of engineering systems. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction ENGINEERING 23ESB10A ESC 2 0 2 0 3 2023 GRAPHICS i. COURSE OVERVIEW Aim of the course is to enable the student to effectively perform technical communication through graphical representation as per global standards. The student will be able to apply the principles of projection and will be introduced to the fundamentals of Computer Aided Drawing(CAD). ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Construct the orthographic projection of points and lines located in CO 1 Apply different quadrants. Prepare orthographic projection of solids by visualizing them in CO 2 Apply different positions. Prepare multiview projection and solid models of objects using CO 3 Apply CAD tools. CO 4 Prepare assembly drawing of objects using CAD tools. Apply CO 5 Construct drawings of engineering systems. Apply iii. SYLLABUS Introduction to engineering drawing: Basic principles of engineering drawing, Standards and conventions, types of lines, Introduction, planes of projection, projection of points in all the four quadrants. Projection of straight lines. Orthographic projection of solids: Projection of regular solids. Introduction to section, development, isometric and perspective projection. Introduction to Computer Aided Drawing: Introduction to drawing software, sketching of 2D simple geometries, editing and dimensioning of 2D geometries. 3D part development. 3D Assembly of Mechanical Components: Mechanical Joints and Couplings Residential Building & Electrical Systems Drawing: Plan and elevation of simple buildings with dimensions, electrical drawings and circuit drawings. 47 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 48 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Introduction to engineering drawing: Basic principles of engineering drawing, Standards and conventions, types of lines, Introduction, planes of projection, projection of points in all the four quadrants. Projection of straight lines inclined to one plane and inclined to both planes. Trace of line, inclination of lines with reference planes, true length of line inclined to both the reference planes |  |  | 12 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Orthographic projection of solids: Projection of simple solids such as triangular, rectangle, square, pentagonal and hexagonal prisms, pyramids, cone and cylinder. Projection of solids in simple position including profile view. Projection of solids with axis inclined to one of the reference planes and with axis inclined to both reference planes. Introduction to section, development, isometric and perspective projection |  |  | 12 |  |  |
| III |  |  | Introduction to Computer Aided Drawing: Role of CAD in design and development of new products, advantages of CAD. Creating two dimensional drawing with dimensions using suitable software Introduction to Solid Modelling: Creating 3D models of various components using suitable modelling software |  |  | 14 |  |  |
| IV |  |  | 3D Assembly of Mechanical Components: Drawing of Cotter Joints, Knuckle Joint, Shaft couplings and Oldham's coupling |  |  | 12 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. Bhatt N.D, Engineering Drawing, Charotar Publishing House Pvt. Ltd, 53rd Edition, 2. John K.C., Engineering Graphics, Prentice Hall India Publishers, 1st Edition, 2009. 3. C. M.Agrawal, BasantAgrawal, Engineering Graphics, Tata McGraw-Hill, 1stEdition, (b) REFERENCES 1. G. S. Phull, H. S.Sandhu, Engineering Graphics, John Wiley & Sons IncPvt. Ltd, 1st Edition, 2014 2. P. I. Varghese, Engineering Graphics, V.I.P. Publishers,21st Edition, 2010. Jolhe Dhananjay, Engineering Drawing with an Introduction to AutoCAD, (1e), McGraw 3. Hill Education, 2017 v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Introduction to engineering drawing: Basic principles of engineering drawing, Standards and conventions, types of lines, Introduction, planes of projection, projection of points in all the four quadrants. Projection I of straight lines inclined to one plane and inclined to both planes. Trace 12 of line, inclination of lines with reference planes, true length of line inclined to both the reference planes Orthographic projection of solids: Projection of simple solids such as triangular, rectangle, square, pentagonal and hexagonal prisms, pyramids, cone and cylinder. Projection of solids in simple position including profile II view. Projection of solids with axis inclined to one of the reference planes 12 and with axis inclined to both reference planes. Introduction to section, development, isometric and perspective projection Introduction to Computer Aided Drawing: Role of CAD in design and development of new products, advantages of CAD. Creating two dimensional drawing with dimensions using suitable software Introduction III 14 to Solid Modelling: Creating 3D models of various components using suitable modelling software 3D Assembly of Mechanical Components: Drawing of Cotter Joints, IV Knuckle Joint, Shaft couplings and Oldham's coupling 12 48 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 49 -->

| V | Residential Building & Electrical Systems Drawing: Drawing plan, section and elevation of single storied and two storied residential buildings with flat roof. Electrical Drawing layout for residential building. Circuit drawing and wiring drawing of simple systems. | 10 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Total Hours |  | 60 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Residential Building & Electrical Systems Drawing: Drawing plan, section and elevation of single storied and two storied residential buildings with flat roof. V 10 Electrical Drawing layout for residential building. Circuit drawing and wiring drawing of simple systems. Total Hours 60 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 60: 40 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Lab Work : 20 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 60 marks End Semester Examination : 40 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 02 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 2 ½ modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 40 • Exam Duration: 2 hours 49 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 50 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23ESB10H |  | PROGRAMMING |  | ESC | 2 | 0 | 2 | 0 | 3 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | USING PYTHON |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Apply fundamental concepts, conditional and iterative statements in Python. | Apply |
| CO 2 |  |  | Develop programs by utilizing user defined functions and Data structures in python | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Apply Object oriented concepts to develop programs in Python | Apply |
| CO 4 |  |  | Implement programs in Python to process data stored in files by utilizing the modules NumPy, Matplotlib, and Pandas | Apply |
| CO 5 |  |  | Develop Python Application using package Tkinter by utilizing database connectivity | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction PROGRAMMING 23ESB10H ESC 2 0 2 0 3 2023 USING PYTHON i. COURSE OVERVIEW The objective of the course is to introduce Python programming and develop programming skills to manage the development of software systems. It covers data processing in Python and introduces Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence- based applications and tools, Data Science and Data Visualization applications. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Apply fundamental concepts, conditional and iterative statements in CO 1 Apply Python. Develop programs by utilizing user defined functions and Data CO 2 Apply structures in python CO 3 Apply Object oriented concepts to develop programs in Python Apply Implement programs in Python to process data stored in files by CO 4 Apply utilizing the modules NumPy, Matplotlib, and Pandas Develop Python Application using package Tkinter by utilizing CO 5 Apply database connectivity iii. SYLLABUS Basics of Python- Getting Started with Python Programming, Basic coding skills- Working with data types, Control statements, Selection structure, Iteration structure, Functions, Python data structures: Lists, Work with tuples, Sets, Dictionaries, Strings and lists, Object Oriented Programming: Design with classes, Exceptions, Visualization and File handling modules in python -NumPy, matplotlib, pandas. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS Kenneth A Lambert., Fundamentals of Python : First Programs, 2/e, Cengage 1. Publishing, 2016 50 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 51 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Basic coding skills - Working with data types, Numeric data types and Character sets, Keywords, Variables and Assignment statement, Operators, Expressions, Working with numeric data, Type conversions, Comments in the program. Using built in functions and modules in math module. Building Python Programs: Control statements using break, continue and pass. Selection structure (if-else), Iteration structure (for, while). |  |  | 6 |  |  |
|  |  |  | Programs on Conditional statements and Loops |  |  | 6 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Functions: Arguments and return values, Variable scopes and parameter passing, Named arguments, Main function, Working with recursion, Lambda functions. Python data structures: Lists - Basic List Operations and Methods, List of lists, Slicing, Searching and sorting list. |  |  | 6 |  |  |
|  |  |  | Programs on functions, recursion and lists |  |  | 6 |  |  |
| III |  |  | Work with tuples, Sets, Dictionaries – Dictionary Methods, adding and removing keys, accessing and replacing values, traversing dictionaries. Strings and lists — String traversal and comparison with examples. File handling: The os and sys modules. Introduction to file I/O - Reading and writing text files, Manipulating binary files. |  |  | 6 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 2. David J. Pine, Introduction to Python for Science and Engineering, CRC Press, 2021 (b) REFERENCES 1. Wes McKinney, Python for Data Analysis, 2/e, Shroff / O’Reilly Publishers, 2017 2. Allen B. Downey, Think Python: How to Think Like a Computer Scientist, 2/e, Schroff, 2016 3. Michael Urban and Joel Murach, Python Programming, Shroff/Murach, 2016 4. David M.Baezly, Python Essential Reference. Addison-Wesley Professional; 4/e, 2009.CharlesSeverance. Python for Informatics: Exploring Information. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Basic coding skills - Working with data types, Numeric data types and Character sets, Keywords, Variables and Assignment statement, Operators, Expressions, Working with numeric data, Type conversions, Comments in I the program. Using built in functions and modules in math module. 6 Building Python Programs: Control statements using break, continue and pass. Selection structure (if-else), Iteration structure (for, while). Programs on Conditional statements and Loops 6 Functions: Arguments and return values, Variable scopes and parameter passing, Named arguments, Main function, Working with recursion, Lambda functions. II 6 Python data structures: Lists - Basic List Operations and Methods, List of lists, Slicing, Searching and sorting list. Programs on functions, recursion and lists 6 Work with tuples, Sets, Dictionaries – Dictionary Methods, adding and removing keys, accessing and replacing values, traversing dictionaries. III 6 Strings and lists — String traversal and comparison with examples. File handling: The os and sys modules. Introduction to file I/O - Reading and writing text files, Manipulating binary files. 51 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 52 -->

|  | Programs on tuples, dictionary, strings and files | 6 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| IV | Object Oriented Programming: Design with classes - Objects and Classes, Methods, Instance Variables, Constructor, Accessors and Mutators. Structuring classes with Inheritance and Polymorphism. Abstract Classes. Exceptions - Handle a single exception, handle multiple exceptions. | 6 |
|  | Programs on Object Oriented Programming concepts and exception handling. | 6 |
| V | Packages: NumPy - Basics, Creating arrays, Arithmetic, Slicing, Matrix Operations, Random numbers. Plotting and visualization. Matplotlib - Basic plot, Ticks, Labels, and Legends. Working with CSV files. – Pandas - Reading, Manipulating, and Processing Data. Graphical User Interface-tkinter fundamentals - Event Handling in tkinter, Exploring tkinter, Database Connectivity in Python. | 6 |
|  | Programs on Python packages and Tkinter | 6 |
| Total Hours |  | 60 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Programs on tuples, dictionary, strings and files 6 Object Oriented Programming: Design with classes - Objects and Classes, Methods, Instance Variables, Constructor, Accessors and Mutators. Structuring classes with Inheritance and Polymorphism. IV 6 Abstract Classes. Exceptions - Handle a single exception, handle multiple exceptions. Programs on Object Oriented Programming concepts and exception 6 handling. Packages: NumPy - Basics, Creating arrays, Arithmetic, Slicing, Matrix Operations, Random numbers. Plotting and visualization. Matplotlib - Basic plot, Ticks, Labels, and Legends. Working with CSV files. – Pandas V - Reading, Manipulating, and Processing Data. 6 Graphical User Interface-tkinter fundamentals - Event Handling in tkinter, Exploring tkinter, Database Connectivity in Python. Programs on Python packages and Tkinter 6 Total Hours 60 52 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 53 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 LIST OF EXPERIMENTS 1. CONDITIONAL STATEMENTS AND LOOPS i. Write a Python program to check if a number is odd or even. ii. Write a Python program to find the largest of three numbers. iii. Write a Python program to check if a given year is leap year or not. iv. Write a Python program to find the sum of n natural numbers. v. Write a Python program to check if a number is Armstrong or not. vi. Write a Python program to print first n terms Fibonacci series. 2. FUNCTIONS AND RECURSION i. Write a Python program to find the product of N numbers. ii. Write a Python program to find the second largest of N numbers. iii. Write a Python program to implement linear search. iv. Write a Python program to find the factorial of a number using recursion. v. Write a Python program to find the sum of digits of a number using recursion. 3. LISTS i. Write a Python program to swap the minimal and maximal elements of a given list of unique numbers. ii. Write a Python program to implement binary search on a given list. iii. Write a Python program to implement matrix multiplication. iv. Given two positive integers m and n, m lines of n elements, giving an m x n matrix A, followed by an integer c, multiply every entry of the matrix by c and print the result. v. Given two positive integers m and n, m lines of n elements, giving an m x n matrix A, find the maximum element along with its index position (i.e., row number and column number). 4. TUPLES AND DICTIONARY 53 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 54 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 i. Implement a simple menu driven Python program that stores student names and their corresponding total marks in a dictionary. Allow the user to add new students and marks, and provide an option to display the student with highest marks. ii. Write a simple menu driven phonebook application in Python using a dictionary where the keys are names and the values are phone numbers. Implement functionalities to add a new contact, remove a contact, update a contact's number, and lookup a contact's number. iii. Write a Python program that takes a string as input and counts the frequency of each letter (case insensitive) using a dictionary. Print the result in alphabetical order. iv. Write a Python program that creates a tuple of student names and their corresponding scores. Then, print out the names of students who scored above 90. v.Write a Python function that takes a list of integers and a target sum as input and returns a list of unique tuples where each tuple contains two integers from the input list that sum up to the target. 5. STRINGS AND FILES i.Write a menu driven program to create, concatenate and print a string and accessing sub-string from a given string. ii.Write a Python program to find the longest palindromic substring from a given sentence. Return the substring. iii.Write a function in Python that counts the number of "Me" or "My" (in smaller case also) words present in a text file "STORY.TXT". If the "STORY.TXT" contents are as follows: “My first book was Me and My Family. It gave me chance to be known to the world.” iv.Write a function DISPLAYWORDS () in python to read lines from a text file STORY.TXT, and display those words, which are less than 4 characters in to another file “words.txt”. Create a dictionary with all words as key and their length is value. 6. OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING i. Write a Python program which creates a class named 'Employee' having the following members: Name, Age, Phone number, Address, Salary. It also has a method named 'print- Salary()' which prints the salary of the Employee. Two classes 'Officer' and 'Manager' inherits the 'Employee' class. The 'Officer' and 'Manager' classes have data members 'spe-cialization' and 'department' respectively. Now, assign name, age, phone number, address and salary to an officer and a manager by making an object of both of these classes and print the same. (Exercise to understand inheritance). ii. Write a Python program to create an abstract class named Shape that contains an empty method named numberOfSides(). Provide three classes named Rectangle, Triangle and Hexagon such that each one of the classes extends the class Shape. Each one of the class- es contains only the method numberOfSides() that shows the number of sides in the given geometrical structures. (Exercise to understand polymorphism). ** 7. PANDAS AND MATPLOTLIB 54 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 55 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 i. Implement a program to read data from existing CSV file ‘student.csv' with the columns (rno, name, ml, m2, m3) and then perform the following using Pandas and matplotlib library. a) Read and display the first 10 rows of the CSV file. b) Display the rno and name in the sorted order of name. c) Add a new column total(m1+m2+m3) to the data frame. d) Display rno, name and total marks of all the students in the descending order of total marks. e) Find the highest and lowest mark in m2. f) Plot the marks m3 against name ii. Implement a program to read data from existing CSV file ‘Jobsearchdata.csv' and then perform the following using Pandas and matplotlib library. a) Display the number of columns and rows of table. b) Display the candiate details for each skillset. c) Display the details of job seekers whose salary more than 25000 d) Display the candidate names and year of experience in the sorted order of name e) Plot Distribution of people on preferred locations. vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 60: 40 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Lab Work : 10 marks Lab Exam : 10 marka Total Continuous Assessment : 60 marks End Semester Examination : 40 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 02 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 2 ½ modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 40 • Exam Duration: 2 hours 55 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 56 -->

| Course Code |  | Course Name | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23ESL10Q | 23ESL10Q | DIGITAL ELECTRONICS | BSC | 3 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 3 | 2023 |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Illustrate decimal, binary, octal, hexadecimal and BCD number systems, perform conversions among them and do the operations - complementation, addition, subtraction, multiplication and division on binary numbers. | Understand |
| CO 2 |  |  | Simplify a given Boolean Function and design a combinational circuit to implement the simplified function using Digital Logic Gates. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Design combinational circuits - Adders, Code Converters, Encoders, Decoders, Multiplexer, Demultiplexer and design the Programmable Logic Devices -ROM and PLA. | Apply |
| CO 4 |  |  | Design sequential circuits - Registers, Counters and Shift Registers. | Apply |
| CO 5 |  |  | Illustrate algorithms to perform addition and subtraction on binary and BCD numbers. | Understand |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction 23ESL10Q DIGITAL ELECTRONICS BSC 3 0 0 0 3 2023 i. COURSE OVERVIEW The goal of this course is to impart an understanding of the basic concepts of Boolean algebra and digital systems. This course covers the design and implementation of different types of practically used combinational and sequential circuits. This course helps the learners to develop application level digital logic circuits to solve real life problems. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Illustrate decimal, binary, octal, hexadecimal and BCD number systems, perform conversions among them and do the operations - CO 1 Understand complementation, addition, subtraction, multiplication and division on binary numbers. Simplify a given Boolean Function and design a combinational CO 2 circuit to implement the simplified function using Digital Logic Apply Gates. Design combinational circuits - Adders, Code Converters, CO 3 Encoders, Decoders, Multiplexer, Demultiplexer and design the Apply Programmable Logic Devices -ROM and PLA. CO 4 Design sequential circuits - Registers, Counters and Shift Registers. Apply Illustrate algorithms to perform addition and subtraction on binary CO 5 Understand and BCD numbers. iii. SYLLABUS 56 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 57 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Number systems, Operations & Codes Decimal, Binary, Octal and Hexadecimal Number Systems- Number Base Conversions. Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division of binary numbers. Representation of negative numbers- Complements, Subtraction with complements. Addition and subtraction of BCD, Octal and Hexadecimal numbers. |  |  | 9 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Boolean Algebra Postulates of Boolean Algebra. Basic theorems and Properties of Boolean Algebra. Boolean Functions - Canonical and Standard forms. Simplification of Boolean Functions- Using Karnaugh- Map Method (upto five variables), Don’t care conditions, Product of sums simplification, Digital Logic Gates- Implementation of Boolean functions using basic and universal gates. |  |  | 9 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Number systems, Operations & Codes: Various Number systems - its arithmetic operation - Number Base Conversions- Representation of negative numbers-BCD Arithmetic. Boolean Algebra: Postulates- Basic theorems and properties of Boolean Algebra-Boolean Functions-Simplification of Boolean Functions-Don't care Conditions-Digital Logic Gates Combinational Logic circuits: Design procedure & Implementation of Binary Adders and Subtractors- BCD Adder-Code Converters-Decoder- Encoder-Mux – Demux Sequential logic circuits: Flip-flops- Triggering of flip-flops- Master Slave flip- flops - Excitation table and Characteristic Equation-Counter Design: Asynchronous & Synchronous Counters. Shift registers: Shift register, Ring Counter- Johnson Counter Arithmetic algorithms: Algorithms for arithmetic operations on Binary and BCD numbers. Programmable Logic Devices: ROM-Implementation of PLA. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. M. Morris Mano, Digital Logic & Computer Design, 4/e, Pearson Education, 2013 2. Thomas L Floyd, Digital Fundamentals, 10/e, Pearson Education, 2009. 3. M. Morris Mano, Computer System Architecture, 3/e, Pearson Education, 2007. (b) REFERENCES 1. M. Morris Mano, Michael D Ciletti, Digital Design With An Introduction to the Verilog HDL, 5/e, Pearson Education, 2013. 2. Donald D Givone, Digital Principles and Design, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Number systems, Operations & Codes Decimal, Binary, Octal and Hexadecimal Number Systems- Number Base Conversions. Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division of binary I 9 numbers. Representation of negative numbers- Complements, Subtraction with complements. Addition and subtraction of BCD, Octal and Hexadecimal numbers. Boolean Algebra Postulates of Boolean Algebra. Basic theorems and Properties of Boolean Algebra. Boolean Functions - Canonical and Standard forms. Simplification II 9 of Boolean Functions- Using Karnaugh- Map Method (upto five variables), Don’t care conditions, Product of sums simplification, Digital Logic Gates- Implementation of Boolean functions using basic and universal gates. 57 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 58 -->

| III | Combinational Logic Circuits Design Procedure & Implementation of combinational logic circuits- Binary adders and subtractors, Binary Parallel adder, Carry look ahead adder, BCD adder, Code converter, Decoder, Demultiplexer, Encoder, Multiplexer. | 9 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| IV | Sequential logic circuits Flip-flops- SR, JK, T and D. Triggering of flip-flops- Master slave flip- flops, Excitation table and characteristic equation. Registers- register with parallel load. Counter design: Asynchronous counters- Binary and BCD counters, timing sequences | 9 |
| V | Shift registers Shift registers – Serial In Serial Out, Serial In Parallel Out, Bidirectional Shift Register with Parallel load. Ring counter. Johnson counter- timing sequences and state diagrams. Arithmetic algorithms Algorithms for addition and subtraction of binary numbers in signed magnitude and 2’s complement representations. Algorithm for addition and subtraction of BCD numbers. Programmable Logic devices ROM. Programmable Logic Array (PLA)- Implementation of simple circuits using PLA. | 9 |
| Total Hours |  | 45 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Combinational Logic Circuits Design Procedure & Implementation of combinational logic circuits- III Binary adders and subtractors, Binary Parallel adder, Carry look ahead 9 adder, BCD adder, Code converter, Decoder, Demultiplexer, Encoder, Multiplexer. Sequential logic circuits Flip-flops- SR, JK, T and D. Triggering of flip-flops- Master slave flip- flops, IV Excitation table and characteristic equation. Registers- register with 9 parallel load. Counter design: Asynchronous counters- Binary and BCD counters, timing sequences Shift registers Shift registers – Serial In Serial Out, Serial In Parallel Out, Bidirectional Shift Register with Parallel load. Ring counter. Johnson counter- timing sequences and state diagrams. Arithmetic algorithms V Algorithms for addition and subtraction of binary numbers in signed 9 magnitude and 2’s complement representations. Algorithm for addition and subtraction of BCD numbers. Programmable Logic devices ROM. Programmable Logic Array (PLA)- Implementation of simple circuits using PLA. Total Hours 45 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 40: 60 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 15 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 40 marks End Semester Examination : 60 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 02 • Maximum Marks: 30 • Test Duration: 1 ½ hours • Topics: 2 ½ modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 60 • Exam Duration: 3 hours 58 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 59 -->

| Course Code |  | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23HSJ1NB | 23HSJ1NB |  | PROFESSIONAL |  | HSC | 2 | 0 | 0 | 2 | 1 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  |  | COMMUNICATION |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Demonstrate effective communication skills relevant to Engineering through writing and making presentations | Create |
| CO 2 |  |  | Analyze a variety of textual and audio content for specific needs. | Analyze |
| CO 3 |  |  | Evaluate a given technical/non-technical topic. | Analyze |
| CO 4 |  |  | Create professional and technical documents. | Create |
| CO 5 |  |  | Communicate proficiently in interviews and exam situations and all social situations. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction PROFESSIONAL 23HSJ1NB HSC 2 0 0 2 1 2023 COMMUNICATION i. COURSE OVERVIEW The objective of this course is to equip students with the necessary skills to listen, read, write, and speak so as to comprehend and successfully convey any idea, technical or otherwise, as well as give them the necessary polish to become persuasive communicators. The course aims to enhance the employability and career Skills of students and orient the students towards grooming as a professional. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Demonstrate effective communication skills relevant to CO 1 Create Engineering through writing and making presentations CO 2 Analyze a variety of textual and audio content for specific needs. Analyze CO 3 Evaluate a given technical/non-technical topic. Analyze CO 4 Create professional and technical documents. Create Communicate proficiently in interviews and exam situations and all CO 5 Apply social situations. iii. SYLLABUS Communication Skills: Introducing yourself and others professionally, elevator pitch, recommendation letter, e-mails, netiquettes, telephone etiquettes, demi-official letters. Business Communication and Technical writing: Product description, narrating an incident, report writing, agenda and minutes, memo, Asking for information and giving information, explaining processes and products, giving instructions, planning a course of action. Creative Thinking, Critical Thinking Skills and problem solving: Expressing opinion, GD, Arguing, Reading critical texts (general and academic) and summarizing, listening and responding, Negotiation strategies and decision-making skills. Presentation Skills: Oral Presentation Skills (Proposal presentation), Power point 59 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 60 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 presentation (Projects). Interviews: CVs and Resumes, LinkedIn, Job application, Types of interviews, successful interviews, interview etiquette, dress code, body language, telephone/online interviews, one-to-one interview & panel interview, FAQs related to job interviews. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS 1. Meenakshi Raman and Sangeetha Sharma (2018)."Professional Communication", 3rd Edition, Oxford University Press, 2018 2. Meenakshi Raman and Sangeetha Sharma, "Technical Communication: Principles and Practice”, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press, 2011 3. M. Ashraf Rizvi, “Effective Technical Communication". New Delhi: TataMcGrawHill Publications, 2007. (b) REFERENCES 1. English for Engineers and Technologists (Combined edition, Vol.1and 2, Orient Blackswan 2010. 2. Stephen E. Lucas, "The art of Public Speaking", 10thEdition; McGraw Hill Education, 2012. 3. William Strunk Jr.& Bobwhite, "The Elements of Style",4th Edition, Pearson, 1999. 4. David F. Beer and David McMurrey, Guide to writing as an Engineer, John Willey. New York, 2004. 5. Goodheart-Willcox, “Professional Communication", First Edition, 2017. 6. Training in Interpersonal Skills: Tips for Managing People at Work, Pearson Education, India, 6 editions,2015. 7. The Ace of Soft Skills: Attitude, Communication and Etiquette for Success, Pearson Education; 1 edition, 2013. 8. Anand Ganguly, “Success in Interview”, RPH,5th Edition,2016. 9. Raman Sharma, “Technical Communications”, Oxford Publication, London, 2024 60 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 61 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |
| I |  |  | Need for Effective Communication, Levels of communication; Flow of communication; Use of language in communication; Communication networks; Significance of technical communication, Types of barriers; Miscommunication; Noise; Overcoming measures Non-verbal Communication and Body Language: Forms of nonverbal communication; Interpreting body-language cues; Kinesics; Proxemics; Chronemics; Effective use of body language Technical Writing: Differences between technical and literary style, Elements of style; Common Errors. Letter Writing: Formal, informal and demi-official letters; business letters, Netiquettes: Effective mail messages |  |  | 8 |  |  |
| II |  |  | Need for Creativity in the 21stcentury, Imagination, Intuition, Experience, Sources of Creativity, Lateral Thinking, Myths of Creativity Critical thinking vs. Creative thinking, Functions of Left Brain & Right brain, Convergent & Divergent Thinking, Critical reading & Multiple Intelligence. Steps in problem-solving, Problem-Solving Techniques, Problem Solving through Six Thinking Hats, Mind Mapping, Forced Connections. Problem Solving strategies, Analytical Thinking and Quantitative reasoning expressed in written form, Numeric, symbolic, and graphic reasoning, Solving application problems. |  |  | 12 |  |  |
| III |  |  | Reading, Comprehension, and Summarizing: Reading styles, critical reading, reading and comprehending shorter and longer technical articles from journals, newspapers. Listening Skills: Active and Passive listening, listening for general content, to fill up information, intensive listening, for specific information, to answer, and to understand. Developing effective listening skills, barriers to effective listening, listening to longer technical talks, listening to classroom lectures, Talks on engineering/technology, listening to documentaries and making notes, TED talks. Telephone etiquettes. |  |  | 10 |  |  |
| IV |  |  | Oral Presentation: Voice modulation, tone, describing a process, Presentation Skills: Oral presentation and public speaking skills, business presentations, Preparation: organizing the material, self Introduction, introducing the topic, answering questions, individual presentation practice, presenting visuals effectively. Mirroring, Elevator Pitch Introducing Oneself -one's career goals |  |  | 15 |  |  |
| V |  |  | Formal writing and interview skills: Technical Writing: Differences between technical and literary style. Letter Writing (formal, informal and semi formal), Job applications, Minute preparation, CV preparation (differences between Bio-Data, CV and Resume), and LinkedIn profile. Statements of Purpose, Instructions, Checklists. Interview Skills: types of interviews, successful interviews, interview etiquette, dress code, body language, telephone/online interviews |  |  | 15 |  |  |
| Total Hours |  |  |  |  |  | 60 |  |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours Need for Effective Communication, Levels of communication; Flow of communication; Use of language in communication; Communication networks; Significance of technical communication, Types of barriers; Miscommunication; Noise; Overcoming measures Non-verbal Communication and Body Language: Forms of nonverbal I 8 communication; Interpreting body-language cues; Kinesics; Proxemics; Chronemics; Effective use of body language Technical Writing: Differences between technical and literary style, Elements of style; Common Errors. Letter Writing: Formal, informal and demi-official letters; business letters, Netiquettes: Effective mail messages Need for Creativity in the 21stcentury, Imagination, Intuition, Experience, Sources of Creativity, Lateral Thinking, Myths of Creativity Critical thinking vs. Creative thinking, Functions of Left Brain & Right brain, Convergent & Divergent Thinking, Critical reading & Multiple Intelligence. II Steps in problem-solving, Problem-Solving Techniques, Problem Solving 12 through Six Thinking Hats, Mind Mapping, Forced Connections. Problem Solving strategies, Analytical Thinking and Quantitative reasoning expressed in written form, Numeric, symbolic, and graphic reasoning, Solving application problems. Reading, Comprehension, and Summarizing: Reading styles, critical reading, reading and comprehending shorter and longer technical articles from journals, newspapers. Listening Skills: Active and Passive listening, listening for general content, to fill up information, intensive listening, for specific information, to III 10 answer, and to understand. Developing effective listening skills, barriers to effective listening, listening to longer technical talks, listening to classroom lectures, Talks on engineering/technology, listening to documentaries and making notes, TED talks. Telephone etiquettes. Oral Presentation: Voice modulation, tone, describing a process, Presentation Skills: Oral presentation and public speaking skills, business presentations, Preparation: organizing the material, self Introduction, IV 15 introducing the topic, answering questions, individual presentation practice, presenting visuals effectively. Mirroring, Elevator Pitch Introducing Oneself -one's career goals Formal writing and interview skills: Technical Writing: Differences between technical and literary style. Letter Writing (formal, informal and semi formal), Job applications, Minute preparation, CV preparation (differences V between Bio-Data, CV and Resume), and LinkedIn profile. Statements of 15 Purpose, Instructions, Checklists. Interview Skills: types of interviews, successful interviews, interview etiquette, dress code, body language, telephone/online interviews Total Hours 60 61 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 62 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 vi) Lab Activities 1. Activity: SWOT analysis 2. Activity: Creating LinkedIn profile, preparing CV, mock interview 3. Activity: Reading a technical paper and summarizing 4. Activity: Interpret data in tables and graphs 5. Activity: Writing a report 6. Activity: Oral presentation on the given topic using appropriate non-verbal cues 7. Case Analysis of a challenging scenario 8. Problem solving using mind map/six thinking hats vii . ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 100: 0 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Regular Assessment Project Report Writing : 10 marks Technical presentation through PPT : 10 marks Listening Test : 10 marks Group discussion/mock job interview : 10 marks LinkedIn submission : 5 marks Case Study : 20 marks Project : 30 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 100 marks TOTAL : 100 marks 62 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 63 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23CYP10A |  | ENGINEERING |  | BSC | 0 | 0 | 2 | 0 | 1 | 2023 |  |  |
|  |  | CHEMISTRY LAB |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course |  | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |  |
| CO 1 |  |  | Use volumetric titration techniques for quantitative analysis of water. | Apply |
| CO 2 |  |  | Use spectroscopic techniques for analyzing and interpreting the IR spectra and NMR spectra of some organic compounds. | Apply |
| CO 3 |  |  | Use instrumental techniques for quantitative chemical analysis. | Apply |
| CO 4 |  |  | Organize scientific experiments as a team to analyze the results of such experiments. | Analyze |
| CO 5 |  |  | Interpret experimental data by themselves to apply them to real world problems. | Analyze |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction ENGINEERING 23CYP10A BSC 0 0 2 0 1 2023 CHEMISTRY LAB i. COURSE OVERVIEW This course is designed to familiarize with the basic experiments in industrial chemistry and to accustom the students with the handling and analyzing chemicals and standard laboratory equipments. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Use volumetric titration techniques for quantitative analysis of CO 1 Apply water. Use spectroscopic techniques for analyzing and interpreting the IR CO 2 Apply spectra and NMR spectra of some organic compounds. CO 3 Use instrumental techniques for quantitative chemical analysis. Apply Organize scientific experiments as a team to analyze the results of CO 4 Analyze such experiments. Interpret experimental data by themselves to apply them to real CO 5 Analyze world problems. iii. SYLLABUS 1. Estimation of total hardness of water by EDTA method. 2. Analysis of IR and 1H NMR spectra of organic compounds. 3. Determination of wavelength of absorption maximum and colorimetric estimation of Fe3+ in solution. 4. Determination of molar absorptivity of a compound. 5. Estimation of chloride in water by argentometric method. 6. Calibration of pH meter and determination of pH of a solution. 63 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 64 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 7. Potentiometric titration: Acid – base titration 8. Estimation of dissolved oxygen in water by Winkler’s method. iv. REFERENCES 1. R. K. Mohapatra, Engineering Chemistry with Laboratory Experiments, 2015, First edition, PHI Learning, New Delhi. 2. S. C. George, R. Jose, Lab Manual of Engineering Chemistry, 2019, First edition, S. Chand & Company Pvt Ltd, New Delhi. 3. E. Slowinski, W. C. Wolsey, Chemical Principles in the Laboratory, 2008, Cengage Learning, 11th edition, New Delhi. v. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assessment of Lab Work : 55 marks Continuous Assessment in Lab (Lab work + Record + Viva - voce) -40 marks and Internal Lab test -15 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 60 marks Final Lab Assessment : 40 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vi. FINAL ASSESSMENT (WRITTEN EXAMINATION) • Maximum Marks: 40 • Test Duration: 1 hour 64 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 65 -->

| Course Code | Course Name |  | Category | L | T | P | J | Credit |  | Year of |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | Introduction |  |
| 23ESB10P | MANUFACTURING AND |  | ESC | 1 | 0 | 2 | 0 | 2 | 2023 |  |  |
|  | CONSTRUCTION PRACTICES-B |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Course | Description | Level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Outcomes |  |  |
| CO 1 |  | Explain the basic manufacturing, metal joining and machining processes. | Understand |
| CO 2 |  | Demonstrate general safety precautions in different mechanical workshop trades. | Understand |
| CO 3 |  | Prepare simple models using fitting, carpentry, sheet metal, welding and 3D printing techniques. | Apply |
| CO 4 |  | Identify the tools and equipment used in fitting, carpentry, sheet metal, welding and various machine tools. | Apply |
| CO 5 |  | Explain the various disciplines of Civil Engineering and its relevance in the development of the nation. | Understand |
| CO 6 |  | Explain the different structural elements of a building and the building rules and regulations. | Understand |
| CO 7 |  | Apply engineering principles and tools to set-out a plan, estimate the area and profile of plots, and construct masonry walls. | Apply |
| CO 8 |  | Examine the quality of different building blocks. | Apply |
| CO 9 |  | Make use of plumbing tools to install fixtures like tap, T-Joint, elbow, bend etc. | Apply |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Year of Course Code Course Name Category L T P J Credit Introduction MANUFACTURING AND 23ESB10P ESC 1 0 2 0 2 2023 CONSTRUCTION PRACTICES-B i. COURSE OVERVIEW ● This subject is for exposing the students to the various theoretical and practical aspects of manufacturing processes and familiarizing various tools, measuring devices, practices and machines used in the workshop section. ● The goal of this course is to introduce the students to the field of Civil Engineering and its importance in the development of the Country. The course is designed to have lecture sessions on an introduction to the various fields of Civil Engineering and different aspects of construction. The workshop session will provide hands-on experience in certain construction-related activities including surveying and levelling. ii. COURSE OUTCOMES After the completion of the course, the student will be able to: Course Description Level Outcomes Explain the basic manufacturing, metal joining and machining CO 1 Understand processes. Demonstrate general safety precautions in different mechanical CO 2 Understand workshop trades. Prepare simple models using fitting, carpentry, sheet metal, CO 3 Apply welding and 3D printing techniques. Identify the tools and equipment used in fitting, carpentry, sheet CO 4 Apply metal, welding and various machine tools. Explain the various disciplines of Civil Engineering and its CO 5 Understand relevance in the development of the nation. Explain the different structural elements of a building and the CO 6 Understand building rules and regulations. Apply engineering principles and tools to set-out a plan, estimate CO 7 Apply the area and profile of plots, and construct masonry walls. CO 8 Examine the quality of different building blocks. Apply Make use of plumbing tools to install fixtures like tap, T-Joint, CO 9 Apply elbow, bend etc. 65 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 66 -->

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 iii. SYLLABUS Introduction to Workshop practice: Workshop practice, shop floor precautions, ethics and First Aid knowledge. Studies of mechanical tools, components and their applications: Tools: Screw drivers, spanners, Allen keys, cutting pliers etc. and Accessories. Sheet Metal–Sheet metal forming, Sheet metal cutting, Forging, Rolling, Extrusion. Welding– Elementary ideas of joining process-welding, soldering and brazing. Fitting– Study of tools, Practice in filing, cutting. Male and female joints. Carpentry– Study of tools and joints. Practice in planning, chiseling, marking and sawing. Machine Tools (Basic elements, Working principle and types of operations), Lathe, Drilling Machine, Shaper, planer, slotter, Milling Machine, Grinding machine Machining processes: turning, taper turning, thread cutting, shaping, drilling, grinding, milling. Introduction to CNC and 3D Printing. General Introduction to Civil Engineering: Relevance of Civil Engineering in the development of the nation. Brief introduction to major disciplines of Civil Engineering: Surveying, Structural Engineering, Geotechnical Engineering, Hydraulics & Water Resources, Transportation Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Construction planning & Project management, GIS. Structural elements of a building: Foundation, plinth, lintel, masonry wall, column, beam, slab, sunshade, parapet, staircase. Plinth area, built up area, carpet area, floor area ratio. Permission plan of a building – Demonstration. Building rules and regulations: NBC, KBR & CRZ norms. Surveying: Principles, instruments used. Levelling: Principles of levelling using dumpy level - simple levelling, differential levelling. Demonstration of Total Station. Brick masonry – Types of bonds, Masonry arches, number of bricks for construction, other types of building blocks. Construction materials – cement, mortar, concrete. Plumbing tools. Types of roofs, Flooring materials. iv(a)TEXTBOOKS AICTE’s Prescribed Textbook: Workshop / Manufacturing Practices (with Lab Manual) 1. ISBN: 978-93-91505-332. 2. Hajra Choudhury S.K., Hajra Choudhury A.K. and Nirjhar Roy S.K., “Elements of Workshop Technology”, Vol. I 2008 and Vol. II 2010, Media promoters and publishers private limited, Mumbai. Kalpakjian S. And Steven S. Schmid, “Manufacturing Engineering and Technology”, 3. 4th Edition, Pearson Education India Edition, 2002. 4. B.C. Punmia, Ashok Kumar Jain, Arun Kumar Jain, Basic Civil Engineering, 1st Edition, 2003, Laxmi Publications. 5. Rangwala, Essentials of Civil Engineering, 1st Edition, 2012, Charotar Publishing House. 66 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 67 -->

| v. COURSE PLAN |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Module |  |  | Contents |  |  | Hours |  |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 6. Mamlouk M. S. and Zaniewski J. P., Materials for Civil and Construction Engineering, Pearson Publishers, 4th Edition, 2017. 7. B.C. Punmia, Ashok Kumar Jain, Arun Kumar Jain, Surveying – Volume I, 17th Edition, 2016, Laxmi Publications. (b) REFERENCES 1. Gowri P. Hariharan and A. Suresh Babu, Manufacturing Technology – I, Pearson Education,2008. 2. Roy A. Lindberg, Processes and Materials of Manufacture, 4th Edition, Prentice Hall India,1998. 3. Rao P.N., Manufacturing Technology, Vol. I and Vol. II, Tata McGraw Hill House, 2017. 4. W. B. McKay, Building Construction- Volumes 1 to 4, 4th /5th Edition, 2013, Pearson Education India. 5. W.F. Chen and J.Y. Richard Liew (Eds.), The Civil Engineering Handbook, 2nd Edition, 2002, CRC Press (Taylor and Francis). 6. Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 2019, Local Self Government (RD) Department, Government of Kerala. 7. Kerala Panchayat Building Rules, 2019, Local Self Government (RD) Department, Government of Kerala. 8. SP 7: 2016, National Building Code of India 2016 (NBC 2016), Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi, 2016. 9. Coastal Regulation Zone Rules (CRZ rules), 2019, Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change (MoEFCC), Government of India. v. COURSE PLAN Module Contents Hours 67 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 68 -->

| I | Introduction to Workshop practice: Workshop practice, shop floor precautions, ethics and First Aid knowledge. Studies of mechanical tools, components and their applications: Tools: Screw drivers, spanners, Allen keys, cutting pliers etc. and Accessories. | 2 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| II | Sheet Metal–Sheet metal forming, Sheet metal cutting, Forging, Rolling, Extrusion. Welding– Elementary ideas of joining process-welding, soldering and brazing. Fitting– Study of tools, Practice in filing, cutting. Male and female joints. Carpentry– Study of tools and joints. Practice in planning, chiseling, marking and sawing. | 2 |
| III | Machine Tools (Basic elements, working principle and types of operations), Lathe, Drilling Machine, Shaper, planer, slotter, Milling Machine, Grinding machine Machining processes: turning, taper turning, thread cutting, shaping, drilling, grinding, milling. Introduction to CNC and 3D Printing. | 3 |
| IV | General Introduction to Civil Engineering: Relevance of Civil Engineering in the development of the nation. Brief introduction to major disciplines of Civil Engineering: Surveying, Structural Engineering, Geotechnical Engineering, Hydraulics & Water Resources, Transportation Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Construction planning & Project management, GIS. | 2 |
| V | Structural elements of a building: Foundation, plinth, lintel, masonry wall, column, beam, slab, sunshade, parapet, staircase. Plinth area, built up area, carpet area, floor area ratio. Permission plan of a building – Demonstration. Building rules and regulations: NBC, KBR & CRZ norms. | 2 |
| VI | Surveying: Principles, instruments used. Levelling: Principles of levelling using dumpy level - simple levelling, differential levelling. Demonstration of Total Station. Brick masonry – Types of bonds, Masonry arches, number of bricks for construction, other types of building blocks. Construction materials – cement, mortar, concrete. Plumbing tools. Types of roofs, Flooring materials. | 4 |
| Total Hours |  | 15 |

| Cycle No. or Exp. No. | Experiment | No. of hours |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | Machine shop | 1 |
| 2 | Fitting shop | 1 |
| 3 | Carpentry | 1 |
| 4 | Welding shop (Arc welding + Gas welding) | 1 |
| 5 | Sheet Metal | 1 |
| 6 | CNC | 1 |
| 7 | 3D Printing | 1 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 Introduction to Workshop practice: Workshop practice, shop floor precautions, ethics and First Aid knowledge. Studies of mechanical tools, I 2 components and their applications: Tools: Screw drivers, spanners, Allen keys, cutting pliers etc. and Accessories. Sheet Metal–Sheet metal forming, Sheet metal cutting, Forging, Rolling, Extrusion. Welding– Elementary ideas of joining process-welding, II soldering and brazing. Fitting– Study of tools, Practice in filing, cutting. 2 Male and female joints. Carpentry– Study of tools and joints. Practice in planning, chiseling, marking and sawing. Machine Tools (Basic elements, working principle and types of operations), Lathe, Drilling Machine, Shaper, planer, slotter, Milling Machine, Grinding III 3 machine Machining processes: turning, taper turning, thread cutting, shaping, drilling, grinding, milling. Introduction to CNC and 3D Printing. General Introduction to Civil Engineering: Relevance of Civil Engineering in the development of the nation. Brief introduction to major disciplines of Civil Engineering: Surveying, Structural Engineering, Geotechnical IV 2 Engineering, Hydraulics & Water Resources, Transportation Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Construction planning & Project management, GIS. Structural elements of a building: Foundation, plinth, lintel, masonry wall, column, beam, slab, sunshade, parapet, staircase. Plinth area, built up V 2 area, carpet area, floor area ratio. Permission plan of a building – Demonstration. Building rules and regulations: NBC, KBR & CRZ norms. Surveying: Principles, instruments used. Levelling: Principles of levelling using dumpy level - simple levelling, differential levelling. Demonstration of Total Station. Brick masonry – Types of bonds, Masonry arches, number of VI 4 bricks for construction, other types of building blocks. Construction materials – cement, mortar, concrete. Plumbing tools. Types of roofs, Flooring materials. Total Hours 15 LAB EXPERIMENTS Cycle No. or Exp. Experiment No. of No. hours 1 Machine shop 1 2 Fitting shop 1 3 Carpentry 1 4 Welding shop (Arc welding + Gas welding) 1 5 Sheet Metal 1 6 CNC 1 7 3D Printing 1 68 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024

<!-- page: 69 -->

| 8 | Compute area of a given plot using tape, EDM etc. | 1 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 9 | Levelling – Plot the longitudinal section of a road. | 1 |
| 10 | Setting out of a building: Set out a building as per the given building plan. Each group can set out one or two rooms of the building. | 1 |
| 11 | Construct a wall of height 50 cm and wall thickness 11⁄2 bricks using English bond (No mortar required) – corner portion – length of side walls 60 cm. | 1 |
| 12 | Cast paver blocks using mortar and test for strength (Include sustainable materials also). | 1 |
| 13 | Tests for strength of various types of building blocks. | 1 |
| 14 | Study on plumbing and install plumbing fixtures like Tap, T-Joint, Elbow, Bend, Threading etc. | 1 |
| 15 | Plan a rainwater harvesting system. | 1 |
|  | Total Hours | 15 |

Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology Year 2023 / Version 2.0 8 Compute area of a given plot using tape, EDM etc. 1 9 Levelling – Plot the longitudinal section of a road. 1 Setting out of a building: Set out a building as per the given building plan. 10 Each group can set out one or two rooms of the building. 1 Construct a wall of height 50 cm and wall thickness 11⁄2 bricks using English bond (No mortar required) – corner portion – length of side walls 1 11 60 cm. Cast paver blocks using mortar and test for strength (Include sustainable 12 materials also). 1 13 Tests for strength of various types of building blocks. 1 Study on plumbing and install plumbing fixtures like Tap, T-Joint, Elbow, 14 Bend, Threading etc. 1 Plan a rainwater harvesting system. 15 1 Total Hours 15 vi. ASSESSMENT PATTERN Continuous Assessment: End Semester Examination – 60: 40 Continuous Assessment Attendance : 5 marks Assignments : 10 marks Assessment through Tests : 20 marks Lab Work : 25 marks Total Continuous Assessment : 60 marks End Semester Examination : 40 marks TOTAL : 100 marks vii. CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT TEST • No. of Tests: 02 (CAT 1 Manufacturing Practices and CAT 2 Construction Practices, or vice versa) • Maximum Marks: 20 • Test Duration: 1 hour • Topics: 3 modules viii. END SEMESTER EXAMINATION • Maximum Marks: 40 (20 marks for Construction Practices, 20 Marks for Manufacturing Practices) • Exam Duration: 1 hour 69 Curriculum Approved by BoS on 10/7/23,26/3/24 and Academic Council on 9/8/23,19/6/2024
